Good morning and welcome to the National Transportation Safety Board. I'm Jennifer Homendy and I'm honored to serve as chair of the NTSB. With me today are my board colleagues, but before I introduce them, a big congratulations to Mike Graham, who has been appointed as vice chairman of the NTSB. Mike's been on the board since January 2020. Since then, he's been a big advocate for connected vehicle technology and ending distracted driving on our roads. A pilot, he's been vocal in advancing our recommendations on flight data monitoring and safety management systems across all modes of transportation. So again, congratulations, Mike. I personally am very excited, because now I can go on vacation. So thank you. Moving on, I want to introduce our other board members, we have member Tom Chapman, and our newest board member, also great news, John DeLeeuw. John comes to us from American Airlines, where he most recently served as managing director of safety and efficiency. John is also an experienced pilot with more than 4 decades flying for the United States Air Force and as a captain at American Airlines, most recently flying the 787. Captain DeLue's experience in establishing and supporting safety culture, managing complex investigations and communicating about safety, will be an asset to our agency, and to the traveling public, as well as his experience serving as a party coordinator in numerous NTSB investigations. So congratulations, John. Thank you. Today's meeting is open to the public in accordance with the government in the Sunshine Act. We're now going to pause for a safety briefing so we can play the video. Hello, and welcome to the NTSB boardroom. Before we get started with today's meeting, I'd like to quickly walk you through our emergency procedures. First things first, please take a moment to silent your phones or other electronic devices. If you need the restrooms, they're just outside the boardroom on the left side of the lobby. If someone experiences a medical emergency, Our on-site federal protective service officers are trained to respond. They'll call 911, perform CPR if needed, and use the automated external defibrillator device mounted in the lobby between the boardroom exit doors. They're also trained to provide 1st date. There's a 1st aid kit at the security desk in the lobby. If we're asked to shelter in place. Like during severe weather or security incident. Please stay seated and listen for instructions. Our security team will manage the situation and let us know when it's safe to leave. If the fire alarm sounds, please follow NTSB staff to the nearest exit. There are 2 main options. You can exit via the stairs next to the stage. Or you can exit the same way you came in through the lobby. Please walk. Don't run. once outside, you'll be directed to an assembly area. Stay there until we're clear to come back inside. If there's a small fire, our security officers are trained to respond, using one of the fire extinguishers. You'll find them in 3 locations. By the stairwells on either side of the stage, at the front of the boardroom. Mounted on the wall, at the back of the boardroom, and near the security area in the lobby for anyone who needs an accessible evacuation round, you can use the door on the left side of the lobby, which leads you into the parking garage. From there, turn right and follow the walkway to the street level. NTSB staff will be available to assist anyone who needs help. And finally, safety is everyone's responsibility. If you see anything that seems off or concerning. Please let a staff member or security officer know right away. Thank you for helping us maintain a safe and secure space. Thank you, Sherry, for that excellent video. We're here to discuss the final investigation report into 2 fatal rear end collisions. In both cases, the striking vehicle was a 2022 Ford Maki operating enhance-free partial driving automation mode. The 1st crash occurred on February 24th, 2024 in San Antonio, Texas, where the Ford driver rear ended a stationary Honda CRV in the center lane of eastbound interstate 10. The 2nd crash occurred 8 days later on March 3rd, 2024 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The Ford driver rear ended a stationary Hyundai Alantra in the left lane of Northbound Interstate 95, triggering a sequence of crashes involving two other vehicles. Tragically, in these crashes, in these two crashes combined, three people died, and two people sustained minor physical injuries. I say physical, because the trauma that occurs from any crash can be lifelong. I know that certainly, from my own experience, of being rear ended at high speed, while stationary, behind a queue at a red light in 2021. So, to the families and friends, who lost loved ones, or have loved ones who were injured in these crashes, on behalf of the entire National Transportation Safety Board, our sympathies are with all of you. Please know that our work does not end today. I say often that the investigation is just the first stage of our work in order to improve safety. Our recommendations must be implemented, and we advocate for that vigorously for weeks, months, and years to come until they are fully implemented. The NTSB believes that the only acceptable number of lives lost on our nation's roads, or in any mode of transportation, is zero. A lot of people believe that 0 is unachievable. I often say, what if that was your friend or your loved one? We often talk about our nation's roads in terms of reducing transportation fatalities and injuries. We talk about goals, like, oh, 25% reduction or a 50% reduction, again, think about that in terms of your own family. 25% or 50% is not acceptable. The only acceptable number is zero. Unfortunately, we're far from zero. In 2024, according to early estimates from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. There were 39,345 deaths on our nation's roads, down from more than 43,000 in 2021. While certainly an improvement, nearly 40,000 deaths is nothing to celebrate. That translates to about, into about 110 people dying every single day, 110 people, every single day. Millions more are injured in crashes each year. The three biggest contributors are impaired driving, speeding, and distraction, all of which we'll talk about in relation to these crashes. I often hear from manufacturers that automation and vehicles is these solution to what is clearly a public health crisis on our roads. I think they need to be very careful with these claims. I support safety technologies. A myriad of them. After all, safer vehicles is part of a safe system approach, which this board has fully endorsed. In my own vehicle, which is an SAE, level two, partially automated vehicle, I often use Subaru's eyesight, adaptive cruise control. But I steer clear of lane centering, because I know my own limitations. I will get distracted, and I will not focus, so I don't use it. Certainly, I look forward to the day when we can say we've eliminated impaired driving, speeding and distraction. And I'm hopeful in vehicle technologies can make that a reality, but we have a long way to go. To technologies, the board has long advocated for our forward collision warning and automatic emergency braking systems. A 2015 NTSB special investigation report concluded that when combined, these systems could significantly reduce the frequency and severity of rear end crashes. This was confirmed two years later by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, which found that rear end crashes dropped 50% when vehicles were equipped with both systems. The study estimated that widespread use of these technologies could have prevented nearly one million crashes and over 400,000 injuries in the U.S. in one year alone. The evidence of partial automation systems is not as promising. We are fast approaching the 10 year anniversary of the first fatal, partial automation crash in the US, which occurred on May 7, 20, I'm sorry, 2016, in Williston Florida. The NTSB has been concerned about the safe implementation of these systems ever since. More tragedies were to follow. January 2018, Culver City, California, March 2018, Mountain View, California, March 2019, Del Rey Beach, Florida. Over Reliance on automation, which can lead to complacency, played a role in all these. tragedies. Decades of research across various industries, including aviation, concludes that humans are poorly suited for automation monitoring tasks and susceptible to complacency. A 2001 study revealed the air traffic controllers are less effective at detecting conflicts between aircraft when they assume a passive monitoring role as compared to actively controlling the airspace. The effect is even more pronounced under high traffic loads. In 2024, IHS demonstrated that the presence of partial automation systems did not result in lower crash rates and concluded that these systems function primarily as convenience features rather than safety enhancements. That same year, a joint study by the IHS and MIT Center for Transportation and Logistics studied how drivers adapt to partial automation safeguards over time. The results are concerning. Drivers do learn to adjust, to internalize safeguard sequences, and find windows of opportunity to do non driving related activities. In fact, numerous studies have found that when operating a vehicle in partial automation mode, drivers are more likely to engage in non driving related activities than if they were manually driving. You'll soon hear some details on that. In a perfect world, the regulator would set minimum performance standards for safety technologies. Test them, rate them, and put that information somewhere, all auto buyers will find it on the car window sticker. Just like crashworthiness ratings, just like the rest of the world does. But the U.S. government doesn't do this. Automakers are left to create and test to their own standards. In the year 2026, it's simply unacceptable that a car in the U.S. can achieve a five star safety rating, even if it has zero. Collision prevention and other driver assistance technologies. European counterparts are setting standards on what safety technologies must be on vehicles, and how they must perform, and issuing regulations to prevent unintended consequences from mandating such technologies. They are certainly well ahead of us. Thankfully, organizations like the IHS and consumer reports have stepped up to fill the void. Their tests reveal that not all manufacturers' safety technologies are created equal. This is, a fact, many US consumers are aware of. Before I move on, I'd like to invite my colleagues to make opening statements. So, Vice Chairman Graham, you are recognized for five minutes. Thank you, Chair. First and foremost, I want to thank President Trump or his continued support and confidence in the work here at the NTSB. I am incredibly humbled and honored to be named the vice chairman. I want to thank my fellow board members for their work with me over the last 6 years. While we may not always see eye to eye, we are always able to come together in the end and advance our mission of safety. I appreciated learning from each of you and your perspectives over the years, and I look forward to continuing our work together. I would be remiss if I did not thank all the hard-working staff throughout the NTSB. The public gets a glimpse at the experts we get to work with at the public board meetings and hearings. But there are so many others working behind the scenes, as well as every day, to draw knowledge from tragedy and improve safety for all. I would not be here today without the incredible team, 400 plus individuals supporting us daily. I want to thank each and every one of you for your dedication to our mission. I look forward to continuing on the board in this new capacity. Now to the business of the day before us. I am glad to see these investigations come before the board for this public board meeting. Level 2 advanced driver assistance systems are becoming more and more prevalent on our nation's roadways, with over half of all new production vehicles sold in this country, equipped with these new technologies. I think there are a lot of questions about level 2 systems, particularly when it comes to safety. And we will address some of those today. The 2 crashes we are here to talk about today should not only serve as a reminder of the limitations of partial driving automation systems, and they're supporting advanced driver assistance systems and responding to hazards. But they also highlight that the mere presence of a driver monitoring system does not automatically eliminate driver disengagement. The investigations of these two grashes identified some level two implementations that are potentially beneficial, and others that present increased safety risk. There's a reason why many leading industry organizations, including the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, or IHS, do not consider L2 partial automation systems as inherently safer systems. In fact, IHS often refers to them as convenient features. This stands in stark contrast to some of the marketing we see around these systems for manufacturers, which can mislead consumers into believing certain vehicle packages, upgrades, or subscriptions that include level two partial automation, will enhance their safety on the road. Let me be clear. Today, there are no current production vehicles in the U.S. that do not require a well trained, well rested, unimpaired, undistracted, and properly restrained driver at the controls. As we will see today, level 2 systems are what I like to call the Wild West right now when it comes to regulatory environment. These systems differ widely from manufacturer to manufacturer, and performance standards are uneven. We need rules of the road when it comes to L2 systems. And while many focus on the push for autonomous vehicles, we must first address the safety issues with the vehicles on the road today. Thank you to staff for your diligent work on this report and advancing NTSB's body of work on these new technologies. I look forward to our discussion and deliberations today. Thank you. Member Chapman. Thank you, chair, and congratulations to Vice Chairman Graham. And good morning, everyone. I want to join my colleagues certainly in expressing condolences to those who lost loved ones in the San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes. We're discussing today. The recommendations will adopt our intended to help prevent similar crashes and senseless loss of life. In the last 20 years, over 750,000 people have died in traffic crashes on American roads. Well, we have made some improvement over the decades. The number of lives lost roughly 40,000 annually remains stubbornly high. I believe technology will play a key role in further reducing fatalities and serious injuries, but I am concerned that the life-saving potential of advanced driver assistance systems may be diminished if we cannot ensure that drivers remain engaged and ready to respond when technology falls short. I confess my disappointment by the lack of leadership, which Nitsa has shown in the area of addressing issues related to the safe development and deployment of vehicles with automation systems. Because of my own career experience, I naturally tend to view Nitz's efforts in light of what I know about aviation. And here's an example with striking parallels. As FAA seeks to manage the safe integration of drones into the national airspace system, it continues to tightly limit the operation of drones over people. And it does so by regulation. A typical drone weighs no more than a few pounds. Yet, FAA has so far maintained these regulatory limitations to help ensure safety as drone technology develops further. In contrast, highway vehicles weighing thousands of pounds, and equipped with powerful, yet still evolving automation, are operating on our highways based at best on mere guidelines. When the technology fails or is misused in foreseeable ways, the risk to vehicle occupants, and others on the road is potentially catastrophic. Finally, we'll also focus on alcohol impaired driving during our deliberations if we are ever going to make meaningful improvement in safety. We have to solve the scourge of impaired driving. I applaud our team for their good work on this report, and I look forward to the presentations. Thank you, chair. Thank you very much, member Chapman, member Delu. Yes, good morning, everybody. Thank you for the nice introduction earlier. It's your welcome comedy. So it's a privilege for me to serve my country again, and I'm grateful to participate in this public board beating. Um, like my fellow board members, and I do want to express my condolences too, to the members, uh, to families who lost loved ones or were injured in these crashes. So there's a former airline pilot for American Airlines. I'm quite used to new technologies and the new automation, and I've seen firsthand the improvement of aviation safety because of new technologies, and that's also occurring in all the other new modes of transportation also. So technology is definitely changing. And, of course, what we really need to do is to look at, you know, what will the impact be on safety and what will the impact be +and negative. And so follow, a lot of my colleagues that I deal with in aviation, we've often conversed and pondered about these new technologies, and will they make the human person more complacent, because that is a challenge for us. So I look forward to having these discussions today about automation and L2 technology on automobiles, and I want to thank the incredible staff that stands over here, that sits over here for their work and effort on this great report, by the way. So what I always think about is this human interface with technology. And I, I'll have to tell you that, uh, for some of you, them might know this, but, you know, when I grew up, we had a rotary phone, and as a rotary phone transitioned, we had a push button phone, and the reason I say that is because I have an iPhone, and I still, to this day, use my index finger on the iPhone, just because that's what I'm used to. But I see my kids using the whole thumb thing. And they've changed how they use this technology with their thumbs, and I'm still using an index finger. So I see how technology keeps changing, and are we staying up to current with the different generations using it. So folks driving cars like myself for 45 years. The human interface, the new technology may be different than a new generation that's learning to drive. And I'm a big advocate for technology. I think it does improve safety. But we want it to be intuitive. It's got to be useful. And of course, at the end, it has to be safe. So in a couple years, in about 14 to 15 years, I'm going to teach my three grandkids how to drive, Mason, Mabel, and Liam, and when I teach them to drive, I've got to be able to make sure that they know how to use this new technology, and that it's going to be safe for the roads. So, thanks again. And like I said, I look forward to participating as a board member, as a new board member, and thanks again to the staff for your efforts on this behalf. Thank you. Thank you, member DeLoo. Turning to today's board meeting. Each board member has studied the draft report and met individually with the investigative team, but this is the first time we've gathered as a board to discuss the report. I wanna briefly go over the agenda. We're going to have a number of staff presentations, an investigative overview. We'll go into the crash sequence and analysis for the San Antonio, Texas crash, then the crash sequence and analysis for the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania crash. Then we're going to go. This was something we started in the midair collision board meeting where, rather than waiting till the very end of all the staff presentations, the board would ask questions after certain presentations to allow the public to follow along. I think it worked well and made it a lot easier for people to follow along rather than board members going back to what was presented 90 minutes prior. So, uh, well, after those presentations, I think there are three presentations, then we'll go into some board member questions on the crash sequence and alcohol impaired driving. There will be two other presentations regarding Blue Cruise performance, and driver disengagement, and 8S, or advanced driver, assistance system integration, and then we'll have another round of, or a few rounds of board member questions, and then we'll go into data recording requirements, and awareness of NITSA, standing general order, applicable crash events, and the board will ask more questions, And then we'll have a final round for board members to ask questions about anything else that was not discussed in those presentations, but related to these investigations and the technology that we're discussing. Throughout that, then we'll have certain breaks and staff. Certainly, if you need a break or board members, if anyone needs a break, just send me a text. Okay, so the public docket for both crash investigations was released on June 25th, 2025, and contains hundreds of pages of additional relevant material. You can find links to that docket on our website at ntsb.gov. And before I turn things over to our deputy managing, director Brian Curtis. I'd like to thank the agencies that responded to these crashes. Effective post-crash care is central to our ultimate goal of 0 roadway fatalities. And as you will hear shortly, emergency responders arrived at both crash scenes within minutes. I'd also like to thank Honda for assisting us in San Antonio with a post crash inspection of the CRV and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration for notifying us of this crash. And finally, I want to acknowledge our colleagues in the office of Highway Safety and the Office of Research and Engineering for their work, throughout these two investigations and their work in bringing these final investigative reports and findings and probable causes and recommendations to the board for deliberation. So with that, Mr. Curtis. Thank you, and good morning, Chair Homendy. Vice Chair... Sorry, Graham, and members, Chapman and DeLeeuw. I'll now introduce staff for today's meeting. Unless otherwise noted, staff are from the office of highway safety. In the front row, left to right. Dr. Chris Poland, Deputy Director, the Office of Highway Safety, Mark Bagnard, Chief of Investigations, Dr. John Humm, Investigator In Charge for the San Antonio, Texas Crash. Bob Squire, Investigator in Charge for the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Crash, and Dr. Ensar Becic, Automation, and Human Performance. Second row behind me, left or right. Kathryn Catania, Deputy Director for the Office of Safety Recommendations and Communications, Tom McMurray, the NTSB's General Council, Akbar Sultan, Director for the Office of Research and Engineering. Julie Perrot, Safety Recommendations from the Office of Safety Recommendations and Communications, and Dr. Turan Kayagil, Medical Officer, from the Office of Research and Engineering. And in the third row, left to right, Mark Mynatt, audio visual for today's meeting, Dr.Lisandra Garay-Vega, Chief of Report Development, and Mike Brokos, Report Editor. The presentations will begin with an investigation overview by the Office of Highway Safety's Chief of Investigations, Mark Banyard, Mr. Banyard. Thank you. Good morning, chairwoman Hamadi, Vice Chairman Graham. Member Chapman, member DeLu. This morning, staff will be presenting on 2 fatal crashes, one in San Antonio, Texas, and one in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Both crashes involve stationary vehicles that were struck from behind highway speeds, in both crashes, the striking vehicle was a Ford Mustang, Mach E Sport Utility vehicle, being operated in a hands-free partial driving automation mode. The San Antonio and Philadelphia investigations focused on the performance affords partial driving automation technology. Later in our presentations, staff will provide specifics about each crash investigation. However, much of today's discussions will involve the use and performance of driving automation systems. My hope is that these next few slides will be useful as we dive deeper into these systems, as can be seen in this graphic. SAE International has defined the levels of driving automation as level 0 through 5. With level 0 providing only warnings and momentary assistance, while level 5 systems are intended for the vehicle to drive itself in all highway environments under all conditions. Today's presentations will be limited to the three levels shown in blue on the left side of this graphic. Before we move on to the next slide, please note that these three levels, consider the human as the driver, and as such, is required to remaining engaged in the driving task, to monitor and respond to traffic hazards, and address failures of the automation systems. Modern highway vehicles use many technologies to support the driving task, and their capabilities have become increasingly sophisticated. These technologies are referred to as advanced driver assistance systems, or A DAS. which is a broad term, encompassing a variety of systems, including partial driving automation systems. In its most basic form, SAE level 0 systems incorporate limited driver assistance through warnings or momentary assistance. Examples of these systems include blind spot warnings and automatic emergency braking. SAE level one ADAS provides automation technologies designed to support the driver through steering inputs or adjustments to vehicle speed. It includes features such as lane centering or adaptive cruise control, also referred to as ACC. The important word here is, or, as they do not coordinate these functions. SAE level 2 can be described as partial driving automation, which takes driver support to the next level by combining A DAS features that provide both steering input, such as lane centering and controls vehicle speed, through the braking and acceleration features found in ACC. Vehicle manufacturers brand their technologies using specific nomenclature, and typically do not refer to the systems using the SAE driving automation levels. The Ford Mach E SUVs involved in these crashes were equipped with a suite of ADAS technologies designed to support the driving task. In addition to these systems, the vehicles could operate in a partial driving automation mode, which Ford refers to as Blue Cruise. Because Blue Cruise combines both lane centering and speed control functionality, it is an SAE level 2 driving automation system. When the driver activates Blue Cruise, they can choose to use either hands required or hands-free mode, incorporating usage restrictions, such as operating only on blue zone roadways and limiting the maximum cruise speed to 80 miles per hour. In both of our investigations, we found that Blue Cruise was into hands free mode. As I mentioned previously, when using a level two driving automation system, the human is the driver of the vehicle and must always remain engaged in the driving task. The Blue Crew system utilizes two driver monitoring strategies to accomplish this, one using steering wheel torque, and the other monitors the driver's gaze. These systems will be discussed in greater detail in a later presentation. Our investigations focused on the use and performance of automated driving technologies, and the safety issues identified in this area including level 2 crash data, including the lack of federal requirements for data recording, and an inadequate awareness by manufacturers of crash events, level 2 system safety, including deficiencies in Ford's implementation of L2 systems, driver monitoring systems in the need to develop effective strategies that will minimize driver engagement, disengagement, and a lack of federal guidelines for the implementation of partial driving, automation systems, and ADAS integration. In addition to these issues, we also found alcohol impaired driving to be a safety issue, as well. The parties to the San Antonio investigation were the San Antonio Police Department, and the Ford Motor Company, and the parties to the Philadelphia Investigation, where the Pennsylvania State Police, and the Ford Motor Company. This slide lists the on scene and investigative staff in the San Antonio investigation. This slide lists the on scene investigative staff involved in the Philadelphia investigation. And this slide lists the staff who developed the report product from both investigations. This concludes my presentation, and Dr. John Humm will now present on the San Antonio crash. Good morning. Today, I will present staff summary of the San Antonio Texas crash. My presentation will cover the crash summary. Driver and witness statements, excluded factors, why the stationary vehicle was stopped and vehicle lighting evidence. This crash occurred on February 24th, 2024 at 9.48 p.m. on eastbound Interstate 10 near the Woodlake Parkway exit in San Antonio, Texas. The vehicles were a 1999 Honda CRV, operated by a 56-year-old driver, and a 2022 Ford Mustang Mach E, operated by a 44-year-old driver. The Ford was operating with a Blue Cruise hands-free mode activated at the time of the crash. This view shows the crash location on eastbound I 10. The roadway was straight with a slight incline. Investigators noted a clear line of sight to the Honda of about 1300 feet with adequate roadway lighting. The posted speed limit was 70 miles per hour. This slide shows an east looking view of the scene. The blue box marks the area of impact in the center lane. The outline boxes identify the Honda and the Ford, and the insert images show both vehicles at final rest. The Ford struck the rear of the stationary Honda. Event data recorder information, showed the Ford traveling at 74.7 miles per hour at impact. Other vehicle data showed a nearly constant speed leading up to the collision. No driver or system applied braking or steering was recorded in the moments before the crash. After impact, the Honda overturned onto its roof. and came to rest on the left shoulder. The Ford continued east and came to rest on the right shoulder. Both vehicles were using their three-point. There's three-point belts. The Honda driver was treated at the scene by the San Antonio Fire Department and later died at the hospital. The 4 driver sustained minor injuries. In an onseen interview with the San Antonio Police Department, the 4 driver said he was traveling from San Antonio to Houston. He reported that he was following navigation directions to a charging station. He said he thought there was a vehicle stopped in the center lane, but he did not see it. Cell phone records show limited activity with no calls or text messages during the 3 hours before the crash. The driver monitoring system showed that he alternated his glances between the infotainment display and the road. About 2 weeks later, Ford Representatives spoke with the driver and provided their notes to the NTSB. Those notes indicate the driver did not recall seeing taillights or receiving alerts from his vehicle. He also reported that he might have glanced at the infotainment display. The NTSB interviewed a witness who was traveling in a sedan east in I 10 ahead of the Ford. She estimated her speed at about 65 to 70 miles per hour, and traffic was sparse. She reported that she was traveling in the center lane and preparing to exit. She narrowly avoided the stationary Honda by making a quick lane change to the right. After changing lanes, she saw a vehicle strike the Honda in her mirror about 5 to 15 seconds later. She stated that she did not recall seeing any lights on the Honda. As a result of our investigation, staff established the following factors did not cause or contribute to the crash. The licensing of either driver, intoxication of the Ford driver, the mechanical condition of the Ford, highway factors, weather, and the emergency response was timely inadequate. Though we did not interview the 4 driver, evidence indicated familiarity with the vehicle. He owned it from new and had operated it for over 11,000 miles. This allowed us to exclude the driver's experience with the vehicle. Postmortem toxicology, identified ethanol at 0.326 grams per deciliter in the Honda driver's blood, indicating impairment. Working with a Honda technician, investigators did not identify a specific mechanical reason the Honda was stopped. A crack was found in the Honda's fuel tank, but investigators determined it likely resulted from the impact and was not present before the collision. Staff found that while the reason for the Honda stationary location could not be determined, the driver's alcohol impairment could have contributed to the vehicle being stopped in the center lane. San Antonio Police Department body camera footage showed that when officers arrived, the Honda's headlights were on. The NTSB examined the tail light assemblies. Evidence of filament stretching indicated the combination brake and parking light bulb was energized at impact. Although the witness and the 4 driver did not recall seeing lights on the Honda. The physical evidence indicated at least some real lighting was illuminated at impact. Staff found that the Ford driver did not respond to the stationary Honda. The driver had an adequate opportunity to identify the hazard and initiate an evasive maneuver. His failure to respond to the stationary vehicle ahead was due to distraction by the infotainment system, and over reliance on the vehicle's partial automation. A subsequent presentation by Dr. Bechik will provide more context on their driver's overreliance and expand on this finding. This concludes staff's presentation on the San Antonio, Texas crash. I will now turn to investigator Bob Squire to discuss the supporting crash investigation in Philadelphia Pennsylvania. Thank you. Good morning. My presentation will discuss the basic facts and analysis for the crash that occurred in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. My presentation will include a discussion on the location and events of the crash. Driver distraction and impairment, and a previous NTSB recommendation for the installation of passive vehicle integrated alcohol detection systems. The crash occurred March 3rd, 2024 at about 316 a.m. on Northbound Interstate 95 just north of the Betsy Ross Bridge in Philadelphia. The crash occurred during the hours of darkness, with clear weather and dry roadway. The crash occurred in the left travel lane, about three quarters of the way through a large radius rightward curve. The northbound roadway had 3 lanes of travel, a left shoulder of minimal width, and no right shoulder at the crash location. The area was relatively dark, although there were widely spaced street lighting along the right roadside. The location was within a designated work zone that is part of a long term reconstruction and realignment project of Interstate 95 around Philadelphia, where the posted speed limit had been reduced from 55 miles an hour to 45 miles per hour. Depicted in this slide is the nearest speed limit sign located about 1,200 feet before the crash. No work was being done on the highway travel lanes. While the construction project had resulted in some highway rail alignment and a reduced speed limit, the highway melted requirements to function as a blue zone for the hands-free operation. The collision involved 4 vehicles, 2 of which were stopped in the highway travel lane. The vehicles involved were a 2022 Ford Mach E Mustang, battery electric vehicle, a 2012 Hyundai ELANTRA, and a 2006 Toyota Prius, both of which were stationary. Final vehicle was a 2018 Toyota Corolla that was traveling in an adjacent lane. This slide depicts the approximate orientation of the vehicles that impact overlay the top, and every old drone mapping, uh, image done by the Pennsylvania State Police, or the PSP. The mapping documented roadway evidence, and the vehicle positions of final rest. At the time of the crash, the ELANTRA was stationary, and the left travel lane with the Prius stopped ahead of it. The position of these vehicles highlighted by the yellow oval. The Ford, now circled in yellow, approached the two stop vehicles in the left lane and struck the rear of the elantra at a speed of about 72 miles an hour. The impact propelled the launcher forward into the Prius. Post impact to 3 vehicles traveled toward the right, whereupon the Corolla, traveling in the middle lane, was struck. Data from the Ford indicated that the Blue Cruise advanced driver assistance system was activated at the time of the crash. Vehicle EDR data indicated that the Elantra engine was running, but the Prius was not. The four vehicles were occupied solely by their drivers. Evidence concluded that the Prius driver was standing outside the vehicle near the left front of the ELANTRA, and was struck by the vehicle as it was propelled forward. The Elantra driver had the driver's door open with evidence of preparing to exit the vehicle when it was struck in the rear by the Ford. The Elantra driver was ejected from the vehicle. The drivers, the launcher and Prius sustained fatal injuries, the driver of the Ford, who had been belted, sustained minor injuries, while the Corolla driver was uninjured. The 23 year old driver of the Ford held a valid Pennsylvania driver's license. At the crash scene, PSP investigators noticed suspicion of alcoholic beverage use to which the driver acknowledged consuming. The driver's hospital serum ethanol test measured a level of 0.126 grams per decyliter approximately 3.5 hours after the crash. Back extrapolation analysis estimated a blood ethanol level of about 0.14 to 0.19 grams per deciliter at the time of the crash, which did exceed the state's per se law of 0.08 grams per deciliter. A separate toxicology results from a blood specimen collected by law enforcement at an unknown time after the crash also indicated the presence of Delta 9 THC at 11 at a level of 7 nanagrams per milliliter. The results indicated that the driver had used a cannabis product, but cannot be used to determine the time of last use, or whether significant psychoactive effects were present at the time of the crash. Therefore, although any psychoactive effects of cannabis could have worsened the drivers impairment beyond the effects of alcohol alone, whether this was a factor in a crash could not be determined. The investigation excluded the following factors is contributing to the crash. They were the licensing of the Ford driver, the mechanical condition of the Ford, highway factors, the weather, and we found that emergency response to the crash was crash was timely and adequate. The driver facing camera that supports the driver monitoring system in Ford recorded a single image of the driver two seconds before the impact. The image showed the driver sitting upright, facing forward with both eyes open, and their hands and wrists resting at the top of the steering wheel, with the left hand apparently holding an object that investigators found to be characteristic of a mobile phone. There was no evidence that the driver responded to the stationary vehicles. Dr. Bechic will present further details on the vehicle's automation system and driver engagement. Our analysis found that the driver approaching the stop vehicles could have had a line of sight of about 524 feet. The approach speed of the Ford limited the driver's possible observation and response time to about five seconds. Had the vehicle been traveling at the 45 mile per hour speed limit, the available time would increase to almost 8 seconds. Well, the crash data acquired from the Ford showed that neither the driver nor the vehicle system initiated a mitigation response to the stopped ELANTRA, the data did indicate the system generated a forward collision warning alert about two tenths of a second before the crash. Well, it's not known whether the alert was conveyed to the driver display, this would have been had insufficient time for any mitigation. At the crash location, the state police reported on a single vehicle crash that occurred just before the fort involved crash. That crash involved a 2015 Hyundai Genesis that had been traveling in the left lane. The driver lost control while swerving around the stationary launchus in Prius. Data from the Ford image processing module, exhibited that the system likely was tracking this vehicle, with data time stamped at 1.8 and 2 seconds before the Ford Impact. The data reported a moving vehicle at a distance of about 232 feet, with a lateral offset from the Ford, consistent with the swerving maneuver. as depicted in slide. Had the pre crash data record included additional time, and extended tracking history would have been available. Staff identified several key conclusions about the crash. The speed of the Ford exceeded the posted work zone speed limit, which also reduced the duration of the clear line of site for the driver to view the stopped elantra, thereby reducing the driver's potential response time. The Ford driver was impaired and distracted by a parent cell phone use. The driver was disengaged from the driving task, and as Dr. Betch's presentation will highlight, exhibited it over reliance on the vehicle's partial automation. Following a January 2020 crash in Avenel, California, the NTSB issued safety recommendation H 2222 to NITSA seeking a requirement that all new vehicles be equipped with passive vehicle integrated alcohol impairment detection systems. In January 2024, and it's issued a request for comments on advanced impairment driving prevention technology. NITSA has projected completing an analysis of the comments by November of this year. Notwithstanding the 2021 enactment of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, where the U.S. Department of Transportation was directed to issue a final rule, within 3 years, NITSA has not included a projected timeline on issuing a notice to proposed rule making, and a final rule. Staff found that the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's failure to meet the statutory date for completing a final rule continues to expose the public to dangers posed by impaired drivers. As such, age 22, 22, is classified as open, on acceptable response, and staff proposes reiteration of the recommendation. Thank you. This includes staff's presentations related to the crashes, and we welcome your questions related to the crash events and alcohol impaired driving. Well, thank you, Mr. Banyard, Dr. Humm, and Mr. Squire, for those excellent presentations. We are going to turn to the first round of board member questions. And this, just as a reminder, we'll be focused on crash sequence and alcohol impaired driving, the issues that were just presented. Please limit your questions to those specific areas and not to get ahead of staff presentations. Again, for those watching. The purpose of this discussion is to highlight those areas where we believe that we can make the biggest difference, to improve safety. And we're actually gonna take do things out of order a little bit. Member Chapman has been a big advocate on our recommendations, on implementing our recommendations, on impaired driving. Each board member has specific focus areas, when it comes to our recommendations, and this is an area, he has focused on both nationally and in the states, we all appreciate his tremendous advocacy, and including numerous recent testimonies before different state legislatures. So thank you for that, and we'll start with Member Chapman. Well, thank you, Chair, and I appreciate the opportunity to open the questioning on this very important topic. Anecdotally, admittedly, anecdotally, I have heard accounts of drivers feeling more comfortable driving impaired in their vehicles with level 2 partial automation. Now, again, it's important to emphasize that drivers of level 2 vehicles must still constantly supervise the advanced driver assistance systems and be prepared to respond. How concerned are you that some drivers may be using level 2 systems to make themselves better impaired drivers? Well, clearly, that can be a concern, but the, it is important to emphasize that impaired driver is a danger on the roadway, whether operating vehicle manually or with an aid of ACC or partial automation. The only difference is the cost of impaired driving, or inattentive driving, otherwise, might be realized a little bit later in partial automation, but it will occur. Thank you. And is this a concern that the auto manufacturer, if you're aware? Is this a concern, the auto manufacturers or NITSA share the essentially the abuse of level two? By impaired drivers? Regarding the um, Impairment as a broader issue, regardless of the mode of operation manual or uh, or in partial automation, the our recommendations, and as far as I'm aware of the industry's uh, approach is to address it as the broader issue of impairment, regardless of the mode in which the driver operates the vehicle. Okay. In the Philadelphia crash, there were signs that the Mach E SUV driver may have been using a phone in a way that kept the driver's eye gaze forward to avoid distraction alerts from the Ford's driver monitoring system. So, we have an impaired driver, who was essentially circumventing the driver monitoring system, to avoid alerts while operating in Blue Cruise hands free mode, over relying on the automation. And with the speed set at 27 miles per hour above the posted speed limit, and a 45 mile per hour work zone. What could go wrong? It's clear, we're going to have to continue to grapple with impaired driving. I'm wondering, is the driver monitoring system for Ford's Blue Cruise or comparable systems of other level 2 manufacturers? Are those driver monitoring systems capable of detecting impairment? For its DMS is not designed to detect impairment, and Dr. Tehran can discuss the other methods of detecting impairment, if you wish to? Sure sure. Generally, there are 2 major categories when you're looking at trying to detect impaired driving. One is a method of directly detecting a substance, like a system that would detect the presence of alcohol, for instance. And then you're going to be looking at systems that actually look at driving behavior. So monitoring the driver, monitoring signs that you might pick up on something like an in vehicle camera system, or monitoring the driving itself, such as control of speed and lane position. So the limitation of that latter category is that it requires impaired driving to be actively taking place before it gets picked up on. Right right. But these systems, they are, or certainly soon, will be capable of detecting impaired driving, is that correct? Yes, there's a lot of work going on towards that, particularly in the area of alcohol impaired driving. How long has NTSB recommended that NITSA expand the use of in vehicle impairment, detection to technology to prevent an alcohol impaired driver from operating a passenger vehicle? I'm told since 2010, 2010. And how has Nitzer responded to our recommendations? So there's Nitz has been working on it slowly, and we continue to encourage them to get to the end of that process. So it's fair to say that Nitza has responded slowly in your words, correct? Slowly, I would say, there's work going on. It's not that they've said no. Right, but it is slow, slower than we would have liked. Right. Thank you, chair. I have some more questions. Thank you, member Delu. Yes, thanks again, staff, and thanks for the great brief on this both events. I have a couple questions on the San Antonio crash. I noticed that in the report, you were talking about how the driver was distracted, and I've been in cars like this, and it sounded like that the driver was being distracted because he was looking for a charging station. And I've read before about something called range anxiety, where they're doing it, was that, was the battery super low on this car? I mean, was the driver about to turn out a juice, basically? We don't have any information on the state of charge of the vehicle. But just not available in the Correct, from even the driver himself. Correct. I mean, we don't have information on the state of charge of the vehicle, but we do know that he was looking at his info tainment system for directions, which I think could be a cause of distraction, if you're worried about running out of juice. Correct. Okay. I also was somewhat interested about the lights on the Honda. So the other witnesses, they didn't see the lights, and then this driver also didn't see the lights. But you mentioned that the filament was expanded enough where you believe it was light on. You think it was just that bulb, though, or all of them on? Because, to be honest with you, driving on a highway at night, if there's a car stop without the lights on, it doesn't matter what technology I've. You could easily be killed. I've seen it. So I'm a little bit hesitant about saying that technology can save things, if the lights aren't even working on a car. Sure. So when San Antonio Police Department, the body camera footage, um, that we observed when they came on the scene, the headlights were on, there also was the left rear hazard light was on, the other was broken. Um, and then we uh, obtained the real tail light assembly, and that's where we observed the mechanical stretching in the filament, and that was the parking slash brake bulb. Um, and so that indicated that there was at least some, um, illumination in the rear of the Honda. Okay. I did want to follow up, but one thing, It didn't get brought up, necessarily, I saw it earlier in the report there, but the lady that was driving in Philadelphia, had the, we believe, the cell phone of some sort, looking there, but I saw one of the restrictions on the use of technology, the Blue Cruise was the use of sunglasses, dark sunglasses. Now, I recognized this was at 3 in the morning when they were driving. But, is there, do we look where any of the, were any of the drivers, I need the cars wearing sunglasses? I realize it's a night, but I see people walk around with sunglasses in a dark room all the time, so... Neither of the four drivers was wearing sunglasses. The San Antonio driver was wearing eyeglasses. What kind of glasses? Eyeglasses. Okay eyeglasses. And so the it's the sunglass blocking that is the limiting factor. So, well, there certainly could be conditions that would limit the DMS ability to detect the driver's gaze. If there is such an occurrence that the DMS cannot detect the driver's gaze, they would not be able to engage Blue Cruise in the 1st place, or it would be disengaged or request driver to take control. So if they were driving the car in the daytime and put the sunglasses on, the system would detect it, and it would disconnect the blue cruise. It would depend on type of sunglasses with most sunglasses, it should be able to detect case. Give direction. So the, I did see on both of them, I appreciate, remember Chapman's, um, interest in drug driving and the limits, I am too. What actually is the limit for Texas and for Pennsylvania? I didn't think I see that. Well, I wouldn't call it a limit, per se law. Okay. It basically is, and I'll let John refer to Texas, but in Pennsylvania's .08. Okay. And basically that says you don't have to exhibit signs of impairment that's simply having that level of alcohol in your blood is sufficient for a conviction of driving impaired. Okay? Correct. That'd echo that, that there's no safe limit to driving while impaired. But, um, yeah, I believe it's the same 0.08. Okay, so I think in my research in all this, it's interesting. I believe there's only one state that's at 0.05. Is that the state of Utah? Correct. So have we seen a change and how long has that been .05 in Utah? It's been multiple years, and MitzA actually did a study to see if that was an effective change, and they did find that, um, alcohol impaired driving crashes did go down, and some of the concerns related to um potentially the alcohol industry were not realized with the decrease to 0.05. So they saw that as a success. So I guess shout out and kudos to the state of Utah. And remember to do that change was made in 2018, just as FYI. Yeah, I guess I wasn't quite aware of that till I had this new position, but I think, uh, for me personally, I like to say congratulations to recognized state of Utah, for being proactive in that. And I yield my time up. Okay, thank you. In the San Antonio crash, and this is a question for Ms. Poland. In the San Antonio crash, the Maquis driver reported to San Antonio PD, or it could be for either, I think Dr. Ham, you're doing San Antonio, right? Okay. Uh, the Maquis driver reported to San Antonio Police Department and Ford representatives that he frequently glanced at the infotainment console to, for directions to a charging station before the collision, infotainment functionality is certainly expanding in vehicles which presents a distraction risk while driving. The AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety commissioned the University of Utah to carry out research on vehicle infotainment systems to address three important questions. Number one, which task is the most demanding to complete while driving. Calling, dialing, sending a text message, tuning the radio, or programming navigation. What level of demand is associated with completing these tasks, using voice commands, touchscreens, or other interactive technologies, and three, how does demand for these interactions vary? Across the infotainment systems found in different vehicle makes and models? Specifically, the research examined the visual and cognitive demand associated with completing selected common tasks, including making a phone call, sending a text message, tuning the radio and programming navigation systems, in 30 Model Year 2017 vehicles. Not surprisingly, all tasks were associated with higher levels of cognitive demand. But overall, navigation was found to be the most demanding tasks, more so than texting, including inputting addresses. The radio tuning and navigation tasks led to higher levels of visual eyes off road demand than the calling, dialing, and text messaging tasks. The text messaging and navigation tasks led to significantly longer task completion times than tuning the radio and calling or dialing tasks. The longest task, interaction times were associated with navigation, which took an average of about 40 seconds to complete. We see that play out in this scenario, though this driver was not inputting an address. This driver was looking for a charging station. That driver was looking away from the forward roadway, 14 to 20 seconds in the last 30 seconds before the crash. The University of Utah recommended automakers improve their infotainment systems by designing systems that are no more demanding than listening to the radio. Have we looked at infotainment systems and their role in driver distraction? I understand that NITZA has some guidance. I think it's pretty outdated compared to where vehicles are today. But is that something that the NTSB has looked at in the past? Or are you aware of any recent work by NETSA? So NITSA does have some work in the early 2010s, 20 teens, where they were looking at guidance on distraction from these types of systems, and saying that the system should be designed to minimize distractions, specifically talking about two seconds worth of distraction. They had some additional updated information on that. And the NTSB continues to be concerned. As you pointed out, for numerous, numerous reasons for the distraction. And we do have a recent recommendation that focuses on distraction, including distraction caused by infotainment systems. Yeah, and I think infotainment systems is a growing area. I mean, I don't know, at least for us, whether it's infotainment systems, I think all of us remember touching dials, you could easily, put your hand over, and tune something, or push something, and now you have to look at a screen. It is very distracting, and I think more research needs to go on, go towards that. I certainly appreciate that the work that was done by the AAA Foundation. But Nitsa guidance is back at 2013 guidance, and there's not a lot of discussion with drivers or focus on drivers with the distraction involved with infotainment systems. I do have other questions. I know that this one, I had talked to staff about potentially a new recommendation on infotainment systems, but I think this isn't the one to do it, but it is something I'm interested in going forward. So with that membergram. Vice Chairman Graham. Thank you, chair. I'm going to discuss the circumstances around the Philadelphia crash. As you all pointed out, that the driver was alcohol impaired, via testing, but the test also revealed that the driver had Delta 9 THC in her system. I think it is important for the public to understand the difference between alcohol and other drug detection in tests like these. What are some of the differences and difficulties in determining driver impairment from drugs such as marijuana and cannabis compared to alcohol? So alcohol really is the exception, rather than the rule, when it comes to determining impairment from toxicological data, but then there are particular challenges that correspond to cannabis and marijuana. So, alcohol is amenable to such determinations because it distributes through the body in a predictable way. It's eliminated in a predictable way, and we have very well studied and well understood, predictable effects of certain ways of ethanol on performance. None of those things are really true when it comes to cannabis and marijuana. We know that it's a potentially impairing substance. We know that it has significant acute psychoactive effects that generally last for hours after use. But there is no THC level, Delta 9THC level, which is the primary psychoactive substance in cannabis and marijuana. that corresponds directly to a particular level of impairment. So, often, we find ourselves in the position of trying to estimate whether an individual is in that time window where they're still experiencing those acute psychoactive effects of the substance. And because of the way that the THC distributes through the body, there are a couple of challenges with that. If you're looking at a test that's delayed, well, you might already have gone past the period of time where THC has redistributed rapidly into fatty body tissues, then THC that's stored in body tissues can be released in a time release fashion, essentially, so that it makes it much more difficult to back extrapolate what a previous THC level would be. So, whereas, you might say, a certain individual who only occasionally uses cannabis would be expected to fall below a set low threshold within hours after their last use. Somebody who was a chronic or frequent user of cannabis might show levels above that for days after the last time that they used. So well beyond that window of acute psychoactive effects. In general, that makes it very difficult to determine impairment from measuring a DHC level. level
Thank you for that doctor. Understanding that we cannot directly determine the level, the crash involved driver was impaired by these substances that were found in our system. What type of impairment is possible from the levels of the Delta 9THC that were found in our system? So, the level in her system was 7 nanagrams per milliliter. I will caution that we don't know when that specimen was collected, because that information was not available in the records that we reviewed. But an individual has a level of seven nanagrams per milliliter might be in that window of acute psychoactive effects if they're an occasional user. If they're a chronic user, they might be outside of that window. Possible psychoactive effects of cannabis could adversely affect driving performance by slowing reaction time, worsening control of lane positioning and following, impairing coordination, attention, root planning, decision making, risk assessment, judgment of time and distance. So there's a myriad of ways that that can affect adversely driving performance. And then those effects are also additive with impairing effects of ethanol alcohol. Thank you for that, doctor. I'll come back to this next round. Thank you. Member Chapman. Thank you, chair. What is the driver alcohol detection system for safety, also known as dads? What is that program and how does it fit into Nitz's efforts? So, Dad's is a system that was a cooperative program between several vehicle manufacturers and NITSA, to develop a system that could detect alcohol in a driver, either through, um, detection, uh, breath-based detection, surrounding the driver, or even potentially through the skin, with, like, uh, touch activation, maybe with a pushbutton start for the vehicle. And if the vehicle were above the per se limit for that state, then the vehicle wouldn't be able to move. So basically a system that would prevent, um, the activities that we were talking about earlier would basically detect that the driver was above the legal level in that state and wouldn't allow the vehicle to move, unlike some of the systems we were talking about earlier, that could detect impairment through the driver's performance. But in that case, the vehicle would already be in motion with a potentially impaired driver. And where does the dad's program stand now? So, as we talked about earlier, NTSB has been pushing for that type of a program to move much more quickly, right now, it's in a state where there's testing being done on commercial drivers. So by our understanding, it's progressing. We would like to see it, of course, progress much more quickly, because as you mentioned at the beginning, we have about 13,000 fatalities every year associated with alcohol impaired driving. And as I recall, the dad's program specifically has been around for 20 years, I think, I think this goes back to 2005 or something like that. And if I'm wrong about that, please holler, but I know that one of the frustrations with the dad's program is that it has taken a dog's age to make any progress on this. And so, at one time, I know we were specifically supporting the dad's program. We've moved away from that now, and our focus is more on development of other technologies. It could include dads, but certainly there are other technologies that are showing promise in this area. I have to say, personally. I've kind of given up on dads. I'm not sure where we're going to get there. Be nice if we would, but it's taken a long time. Progress has been very, very slow. The new car assessment program. It does not currently, this is the U.S. new car assessment program, also known as NCAP. It does not currently rate alcohol impairment technology. Does the European version of that program, the European end cap, include ratings for in vehicle alcohol impairment technology for new cars? You're correct that the US Uncap program does not have a rating for detecting alcohol impaired systems. And my understanding of the Euro NCAP program is that it doesn't have a rating for a direct type of alcohol detection system, but it does have a system that, if the driver isn't performing at their best, for whatever reason, whether it's the distraction, fatigue, impairment, or any other reason, that the Euro NCAP system can give credit, if the additional collision avoidance features are activated earlier, if the driver is not engaged to be respond to a hazard. And that could be for any number of reasons. That could be for impairment or distraction or even some sort of a medical situation. That's correct. And I think Dr. Betch would like to add. Yeah please. They do give a credit for various driver states, such as distraction, fatigue, regarding impairment, the credit they give, if the vehicle is ready, so it has an sort of an interlock type of device, is ready to receive the new technologies, as they have recognized that the maturity level of technology isn't there yet to make it an expectation. But more of a preparedness for the future. Thank you. Cher, I do have a couple more questions. I appreciate it. Thank you, member DeLoo. Yes, I have two questions. Dr. Keigel, I think I said it right. Um, so I'm not familiar with statistics of that, but I'm familiar, obviously, with drunk driving, that type of thing, but how many of the folks, uh, statistically speaking, if they're drunk driving, they also have other substance in their system. Do we have any numbers on that type of thing? It's very common. Um, We did, NTSB, released a safety research report in 2022 titled Alcohol, other drug, and multiple drug use among drivers. Um, and we Datashets showed that alcohol was the most commonly used, potentially impairing drug by a good margin. And in most of those data sets, it was only slightly more often found alone than in combination with other potentially impairing substances. Okay. Oh, that's interesting. The one thing I do want to follow up on, and Chairwoman Muhammad, thank you for bringing this up. I actually had a car for a while that had an entertainment center, they called it. I call it something completely different, which I can't do in public. But the point was, is you could not do anything in that car change unless you touch that center console. This was a fairly new car, fairly modern car, actually. Just to change the radio, you had to push buttons and everything, and it was, I thought it was extremely distracting. In fact, I was surprised because my background flying airplanes, I thought, well, this thing could never be certified. Turns out it's not certified. So I really want to fall up with that. I think that the driver in San Antonio, which was probably doing everything by the law, by the rule, following his thing, but was certainly distracted by that type of technology. So I get the whole infomercial and info screen and stuff, but I think some of the cars I've even rented. They are way too difficult to use when you're driving a car. I mean, it's just, I'm a little older than the chairwoman, but I do remember just taking your radio and moving the thing over to get to AM or FM. That was pretty simple. But I do think that's something that we should look at ultimately someday too. And I know the manufacturers do their own certification of that, but it seems to me something we should follow up on. When the chairwoman mentioned, I thought that's the one thing that really irritates me on some of the new cars. They're too difficult to make a radio change, and that does distract people. It doesn't matter if you paired or impaired. It just, it's just too difficult. So, thank you for bringing that up. I feel better now. Thank you. Well, I think they need to do more. I mean, it's not just about, you know, feeling the knobs anymore. You have to actually look over and figure out which screen you're going to push or some area that you're going to push anyways. Yes, even just change the temperature. Requires you to slide your finger on the screen there. And if your finger's got French fry, grease left on it, it won't change. Okay. I use a napkin first. I'll use a nap first. So I have to stop and pull over. Thank you. We are aware that there is evolution along the lines of what you're talking about in Europe where they are now recognizing that these types of infotainment systems, as you've mentioned, are extremely distracting, and that the traditional buttons to change some of the core aspects are key. And so, um, we're seeing, um, them evaluating those types of systems, and then, um, certain manufacturers that had remained with just the traditional, uh, knobs and switches are getting much higher ratings on some of those new systems than the ones that went for the full, um, kind of iPad type infotainment system. Okay, thank you. Um, I'll say, though, that is good to hear, except the EU seems to be ahead of us in every way when it comes to vehicle safety, and we seem to be lagging behind. I don't understand it, frankly. I mean, you know, just looking at our recommendations, since 1968, we've issued over 150 safety recommendations on impaired driving. What is the substance that is the, and recently, we did something on drug impaired driving? What is the substance, the leading substance, when it comes to drug impaired driving? Alcohol. Alcohol. Full stop. It is a drug. Alcohol is a drug. Uh, and, you know, when looking at the effects of alcohol, we noted a previous study that looked at data from more than 10,000 crash and non-crash involved drivers in California and Florida. It found that a statistically significant elevated crash risk began at a blood alcohol concentration of .04. We talk about .08. We talk about .05. People can be impaired well before. You even get to .05 or .08. It rose steeply at higher BACs, at a BAC of .08, the legal limit for operating a personal motor vehicle in 49 out of 50 states in DC. The crash risk was more than 2.5 times higher. At a BAC of .10, the crash risk was nearly 5 times higher. When a driver is impaired by both drugs and alcohol, their level of risk skyrockets. The odds of being seriously or fatally injured in a crash is more than 28, 28 times higher. Uh, Member Chapman uh, mention dads. Uh, we issued a recommendation in 2013 that Knits and the Automotive Coalition for Traffic Safety worked to work to accelerate dads at the time. Dads, and I went to Boston to look at dads. I believe Member Chapman and others did as well, but it's being demonstrated on what? A Ford Mustang Maki. We we this the federal government, Congress, the DOT, you name it, has spent 1000000s on dads, and we are nowhere closer to seeing implementation of technology to prevent impaired driving with dads. In 2020, after the crash of Avenal, uh, which involved an alcohol impaired driving, a driver operating at speeds above 90 miles per hour, uh, that vehicle across the center line hit a pickup truck, killed both the driver of that SUV and the driver of the pickup truck and 7 children. Terrible. And again, that driver was impaired by alcohol. Then we had passage of the law in 2021, prior to that, we issued recommendations. Also on advanced alcohol, impaired driving technology and vehicles not specific to dads. And you mentioned in your presentation, the three-year deadline, which has passed. We are past the three-year deadline for implementing that rule, and NTSA stated, you know, to NTSB that it's still developing the advanced notice of proposed rule making. Our recommendation is open unacceptable. I mean, what is the latest? On that rule making? Does anyone know? It's my understanding that they're reviewing the comments that they received on the ANPRM. Okay well and there's a there's a November 2026 deadline for that review. Their own deadline or the their deadline to finish the review. And then the problem here is that we don't have the next steps that they're planting, they're plenty to take. They haven't informed us yet of what's happening next either. Right. So they haven't informed us. They haven't given us a plan on what next steps. They are going to take to implement our safety recommendation, which is pretty much the same thing as what is in the 2021 law, which means we are nowhere closer, and it's still evaluating numerous comments with no end in sight, is that's what we are saying. I mean, we have been at this for a long time. And action needs to be taken. And now we have advanced driver assistance technologies that people are using as a means of getting around the system. I can be impaired and drive because this vehicle will operate for me. That is not true. It is not to be used in that way. That's a misuse, that's an abuse of those technologies. So, with that, uh, member, uh, sorry, it's going to take me at least a few days. Vice chairman Graham. Thank you. Dr. Kagel, I thank you for the discussion we had about drug impaired testing and all. Now, I know we're not able to include findings or recommendations in this investigation related to drug impairment due to the issues outlined by you and staff a moment ago. I do want to take a moment to highlight my growing concern with drug impaired drivers on our nation's highways. In our own 2022, safety research report, alcohol, other drug and multi-drug use among drivers, we identified multiple safety issues, including the need to address the growing problems of cannabis and other drug impaired driving, along with the need to improve drug impaired driving laws and enforcement. This is a major urgent safety issue, as medical marijuana is now legal in 40 states in Washington, D.C. and recreational marijuana is legal in 24 states and Washington D.C. Just one year ago, the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety published a report based on a survey of cannabis users that found that more than half of the respondents drove within an hour or less of consumption. And roughly a third of the respondents felt their driving was actually improved while under the influence. University of Illinois, Chicago, analysis found that between 2009 and 2019, there was a 10% increase in motor vehicle deaths in 4 states where marijuana was legalized recreational at that time. The NTSB has spent decades fighting against alcohol impaired driving, as we are doing once again here today. And while we have made significant progress in combating driving, we cannot afford to substitute one form of impairment with another. I hope that our Philadelphia investigation will yet be another signal to legislators, regulators and law enforcement throughout the country of the urgent need to address drug impaired driving. Thank you, chair. Thank you, member Chapman. Thank you, Chair. I want to close my questions in this area, frankly, by getting on my latest soapbox, and I don't think you all will be surprised by what I'm about to say, because we had this discussion during our pre meeting, but if you want to offer some comments. Once I get down for my soapbox, please feel free. Through my own advocacy work on alcohol impairment, I have the sense that the general public often believes that it's legal, legal to drive after drinking so long as the driver's blood alcohol concentration is lower than 0.08, or in the case of Utah 0.05. And of course, that's not the case. The per se BAC number is effectively an evidentiary rule, where the driver presumed to be impaired, without the need for other evidence to establish impairment. So, increasingly, I've taken to referring to the BAC number as a standard rather than as a limit, and this helps to avoid reinforcing the mistaken impression. And I think it is a wide ranging mistaken impression that it's legal to drive if your BAC is lower than the so called limit. So, that's my soapbox, and I appreciate the discussions that we've had about that, and I also appreciate some of the changes that were made in the report just to kind of reflect that concern. Thank you, member DeLoo. Now, what the questions are there to say, I appreciate the work you've done, and remember, Chapman, consider me, your owner, your advocates, and I'd like to work with you. For those that are listening, if you're gonna drink a driver, use marijuana, please don't drive around me and my family. Or don't drive at all. There are lots of other options. Um, I have a question regarding 911 assist. Uh, So according to our investigation in the Philadelphia crash, the vehicle's 911 assist program initiated an emergency call about 2 seconds after the crash occurred. However, that call never went through successfully nor was registered by the Pennsylvania State police. The call process was marked as completed after several connection attempts, which took about seven minutes. How many connection attempts? Does anyone know from the? I don't recall off the top of my head, but there were several. Okay. Again, the Pennsylvania State Police reported having no awareness of a 911 call received from the Ford emergency assist system, I do believe these assist systems are helpful after I was hit from behind, in my vehicle, it immediately called 911 immediately, and somebody came on very quickly, and was very helpful. And certainly part of the safe system approach that we talk about is post crash care, which includes timely arrival of emergency responders and EMS personnel, how were state police notified of the crash? Trooper advised that they had received witness calls. Okay. And when were they able to arrive on scene? I think one of these crashes was 11 minutes, and the other, I think, was 7. Yep. Do we have any information on how often failed connections or failed calls happen with 911 assist programs or the life? Uh, we don't have that information. It should be noted that it relies on the driver's cell phone, and also that the driver enables that system. Right, in this situation, it clearly was enabled because it tried several times. And so, uh, it was Ford responsive. Did they discussed this with you as something that they need to look into or and address or...? So brought up to our attention, after a while, they were able to determine that the 911 assist did make a call after several attempts, but we were unable to determine where the call went, too, because there are several potential areas that could have received the 911 call. Okay thanks. I just wanted to ask a few questions on that. I don't have any further questions in this area, do others? Nope. Okay. Before we move on to the next set of staff presentations, I think we'll briefly take a 15 minute break. So if we can come back at 11:15. That would be great. Thank you so much. All right. Uh, we're ready for the next round of staff presentations by Dr. Betchett. Thank you. Good morning. In this presentation, I will review several topics. I will describe the Ford's suite of advanced driver assistance systems, discuss the implementation and performance of its partial automation system, Blue Cruise, as well as the performance of its forward collision avoidance systems in both crashes. I will then examine driver disengagement in the 2 crashes and discuss the vehicles, driver monitoring system, DMS, and the limitations we observed. Both Ford Maqui vehicles were equipped with the same suite of driver assistance technologies, including Blue Cruise and other ADS. Well, Blue Cruise includes hands required and hands-free operational modes. Our presentations focus on the hands-free operation only. In that mode, either adaptive cruise control or intelligent ACC, which limits crew speed to the detected speed limit, is engaged concurrently with lane centering and camera-based DMS. When hands-free Blue Cruise is engaged, the system monitors the travel path, detects obstacles, maintains lane position and set speed, brakes for vehicles ahead, and monitors driver engagement through DMS. These capabilities are afforded by sensor and camera systems that monitor the environment, the vehicle, the driver, analyze that data, and provide mapping information. The camera and radar fusion combines data from both sensor systems for a more comprehensive interpretation of the environment. In addition to the federally mandated airbag control module, the Ford Maquee vehicles had 2 primary in vehicle data recording modules, and were part of several telematic data collection programs. Together, these data sources captured numerous parameters related to vehicle dynamics, hazard detection, driver engagement, and the operation of Blue Cruise and other ADS. Blue Cruise and other A-Das did not respond. Break or steer in either crash, and neither do the 4 drivers. The capture data in the Philadelphia crash showed that the camera radar fusion system had detected a stopped vehicle ahead 0.4 seconds before impact. However, due to the system's low confidence that the detected stationary vehicle was a threat. It did not activate the automatic emergency braking system AEB. The Philadelphia data also showed that the system had requested a forward collision warning alert, less than 200 milliseconds before impact, far too late for the driver to initiate an avoidance maneuver. The vehicle owner's manual describes limited detection capabilities of vehicles at night, and Ford communicated with NTSP that they do not expect the current generation of radar camera fusion systems to reliably detect stationary vehicles as a hazard while traveling at highway speeds during nighttime conditions. So considering these system limitations. and that hence free blue cruise can be operated up to 80 miles per hour. The expected performance of the forward cast in these 2 crashes is somewhat uncertain. Contributing to this uncertainty is that the FCW and AEB were not required equipment on these maquis, and there were no performance standards. Well, the 2022 Maquis had performed well in the existing AEB performance testing protocols by NITSA and European NCAP. Those protocols did not capture the parameters present in the 2 crashes. In 2024 and it's a issue, the final rule, going into effect in 2029, requiring FCW and AEB systems in passenger vehicles, requiring AEB to completely avoid collisions with lead vehicles, including stationary ones, at speeds up to 62 miles per hour, and to engage at speeds up to 90 miles per hour. Staff found that while the parameters of the 2 crashes were likely outside the capabilities of the FCW and AEB on the 2 Maqui vehicles, the new NITSA performance requirements address those parameters. Furthermore, specifically for the Philadelphia crash. where the speed limit in the area of the crash was 45 miles per hour. Steph found that had the Maki been traveling at the speed limit, FCW and AEB would have been more likely to engage earlier. Alerting the drivers sooner or mitigating the crash. My next topic is driver disengagement. Due to functional and perceptual limitations, L2 systems will fail, such as mistaking a gore for a travel lane or failing to detect a hazard. And if driver's attention is directed elsewhere at that moment, the outcome can be fatal. With the L2 system controlling the vehicle imperfectly, the driver's role shifts to that of an automation monitor, prepare to take control at any time. But the efficacy of driver's monitoring role is compromised by the risk of automation complacency. To mitigate this, manufacturers monitor driver engagement. Hence-free Blue Cruise relies on camera-based DMS to detect driver disengagement. As shown in this image, the camera is located on top of the steering wheel column. DMS is designed to record 5 seconds of pre-crashed data. Also captured is a single image of the driver. This is what the DMS camera sees. A view of one of the NTSB investigators. Given the position of the camera, the captured image does not show the steering wheel. When the system detects the driver looking away from the forward roadway for more than 5 seconds, it provides a series of escalating multimodal warnings. Additionally, the vehicle owner's manual includes warnings about system limitations and directives, emphasizing driver's responsibility to maintain constant attention to the roadway. In the San Antonio crash, the DMS module captured the crash. Showing that the driver was alternating glances between the Infotainment console and the forward roadway, With 3 brief glances toward the forward roadway, Including the last one at 200 milliseconds before impact. Telematic data showed that the driver received 2 days off alerts prior to the crash, 29 seconds and 8 seconds before impact. Combined with the pre-crash data, the driver was looking away from the forward roadway for at least 14 of the last 30 seconds before the crash. This pattern of glances away from the forward roadway, combined with the driver's lack of response, and distraction from the use of infant payment system, all indicate over reliance on the L2 system. In the Philadelphia crash. The DMS module also captured the 5 seconds of pre-impact data. Showing that the driver was looking toward the forward roadway for that entire period. Telematic data showed that the driver had received a gaze of alert 26 seconds before impact. As designed, the DMS module captured a single image of the driver 2 seconds before the 1st alert. This image shows the Philadelphia driver with her face redacted. The DMS image showed the driver sitting upright and facing forward with both eyes open, and circled in yellow, with a left hand holding an object that appears to be a cell phone. The absence of a DMS alert in the final 5 seconds prompted us to examine the extent to which a driver could engage in non-driving activities while using hands-free blue cruise without triggering a DMS alert. With an exemplar Marquis and an exemplar driver, Mr. Squire. We recreated the in vehicle positioning of the Philadelphia driver. The upper image shows the DMS camera view of the exemplar driver matched to the Philadelphia driver's positioning. The lower image taken from the back seat shows the exemplar driver holding a cell phone in vertical position. The exemplar driver was instructed to focus his gaze on markers placed at specific locations, and in some conditions, focus on a handheld cell phone. Well, the DMS accurately differentiated between gaze directed at the bottom of the windshield versus the top of the dashboard, marked by yellow and orange arrows. It consistently categorized the driver's gaze as the front windshield. When he was looking at the cell phone held in the position as shown. Well, DMS in the Philadelphia crash showed that the system had detected the driver's gaze is looking toward the forward roadway. Her lack of response, impairment, and apparent use of a cell phone at the time of the crash, all factor in her disengagement. Her likely use of the cell phone in a manner to avoid receiving a DMS alert, along with the earlier gaze off alert, indicated her disengagement was at least, at least partially due to over-reliance and misuse of automation. We found that DMS on the monkey vehicles was designed such that even very brief glances to forward roadway reset the destruction alert timer, and furthermore, since DMS is designed to examine only the previous 5 seconds. The accumulation of glances away from the forward roadway is not captured. Finally DMS limitation is in distinguishing between driver's attention to forward roadway, and an object in driver's line of sight to the forward roadway permits distraction due to cell phone use without receiving a DMS alert. Staff has proposed one recommendation to Ford to improve critical DMS deficiencies. In each of our previous L2 related investigations, driver destruction and inattention stemming from over alliance on automation were causal factors, resulting in NTSB issuing several recommendations pertaining to driver monitoring during L2 operation. Following investigation of the 1st fatal crash involving a vehicle operating in partial automation mode in Williston, Florida, NTSB issued a recommendation to several automakers who at the time had vehicles with partial automation, 4 did not, to implement a more effective method of monitoring driver engagement, beyond inferring engagement based on the driver applied steering wheel torque alone. Ford's camera-based DMS represents a major improvement on that approach. Additionally, following investigation of a fatal crash in Mountain View, California, we issued recommendations to NITSA and SA International to develop a DMS standard that would minimize this engagement and address automation, complacency, and misuse. However, that DMS standard is yet to be developed. Well Nitza continues research on DMS in support of future potential mandate, other safety agencies around the world have developed testing protocols that account for some of the DMS limitations to be observed in the San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes. including detection. Detection of cell phone use and evaluation of prolonged glance pattern. All of these factors highlight a critical need for NITSA to develop a standardized DMS performance requirements. Staff has proposed closing the existing DMS related recommendations to NITTA and SA International, and superseding them with a new recommendation to NITTA, to develop performance standard for DMS, that would address deficiencies observed in the current investigations, as well as minimizing this engagement and addressing automation, complacency, and misuse. In my uh second presentation. I will discuss the benefits and risks of partial automation, relevant research, and for its implementation of Blue Cruise, and its integration with various ADS. I will then examine the variations in L2 implementation and the absence of federal guidelines and standards. Understanding the benefits and risks of L2 systems necessitates examining its building elements. Considerable research has shown safety benefits of forward casts in reducing crashes and of ACC in increasing following distance. However, the safety benefits of partial automation are debated. Centering on this question. When we automate lane keeping within the limited functionality of L2 systems, do we gain safety benefits beyond those already achieved through AEB, FCW and ACC alone? Any potential additional safety benefits must be weighed against the increased safety risks associated with driver disengagement during L2 operation. Numerous naturalistic studies have found that drivers are more likely to engage in secondary activities during L2 operation than during manual driving. Manifesting as greater interaction with in vehicle or portable devices and longer eyes off-road glands durations. A recent IHS study compared crash rates of vehicles with L2 capabilities, to comparable vehicles equipped with only crash avoidance ADS, such as FCW, A, B, and lane departure warning. Finding that the presence of L2 systems did not result in lower crash rates, so no additional safety benefits. Concluding that L2 systems function primarily as convenience features rather than safety enhancements. With that in mind, we can examine Ford implementation of Blue Cruise. Intelligent ACC was not required to be engaged during Blue Cruise operation. And when engaged, it permitted cruise speeds up to 20 miles per hour above the speed limit. The speed limit in Philadelphia crash was 45 miles per hour. And the Maquee was traveling at 71 miles per hour. Even had intelligent ACC been engaged, which it was not. The speed tolerance would have allowed a cruise speed of 65 miles per hour, negating the system's intended safety benefit. Blue cruise operation does not require AEB valuability. A driver can disable it. Although not a factor in these 2 crashes, such integration can remove a critical layer of safety during L2 operation. For its operational design of intelligent ACC and AEB systems reveals deficiencies in Blue Cruise implementation and integration with other ADAS. Staff has proposed that Ford improve its implementation of intelligent ACC, to use more appropriate speed tolerances, and require AB to be engaged during Blue Cruise operation. Throughout staff's presentations, we emphasized that the driver is responsible for monitoring the environment and detecting hazards and automation failures. However, decades of research across industries, and different model modes of transportation has consistently shown that we, humans are quite poor at the task of monitoring automation. And our experience shapes our perspective and behavior. survey of owners of L2 capable vehicles, across 3 manufacturers, show that owners that were more likely to view their system as self-driving, also reported higher rates of engaging in non-driving activities. Safe and optimal L2 implementation does not depend on any single element. It requires a holistic approach. As these 2 investigations demonstrate, particularly the San Antonio one, even a momentary disengagement during L2 operation can be fatal. And the mere presence of a camera-based DMS does not inoculate against driver disengagement. As such, L2 implementation that promotes driver engagement by design, even in the absence of any driver monitoring would offer a more complete countermeasure to disengagement risk. The current investigations also provide examples of other important factors in L2 implementation such as operating in more complex driving environments. Well, the work zone in the Philadelphia crash was still within the allowable parameters for hands-free operation. For the Blue Cruise implementation was not adaptive to potentially more complex driving conditions. And by that adaptation, I mean, adaptation that could manifest as lower speed tolerances or more aggressive distraction alert thresholds. Some other positive examples of Blue Cruise implementation included cooperative steering, which research has shown can improve driver engagement, and geofencing for hands-free operation, something that NTSP has recommended to other automakers in 2017. Consumer reports in the IHS have recently started rating L2 systems, covering aspects of functionality and DMS capabilities, producing varied ratings across manufacturers, and in some cases differing assessments of the same system, highlighting the variety of implementation approaches across the industry. The implementation deficiencies that staff has discussed, along with a variety of implementation approaches, stem at least in part from the absence of authoritative guidelines or industry best practices for L2 implementation. It's as guidelines for designing in vehicle electronic devices serves as an example of a non-mandate approach that became an industry accepted reference. Staff has found that authoritative guidelines for implementation of partial automation systems are needed to reduce known system limitations, provides safety redundancies, and promote driver engagement by design. Staff has proposed that USDOT develop comprehensive guidelines for implementation of L2 systems that address the issues staff has discussed in our presentations. This point, staff is prepared to answer questions on a broader topic of L2 system safety. Thank you, and we're going to move to rounds of questions by the board on L2 level 2 system safety. I just want to pause for a 2nd though. Uh, thank you, uh, Dr. Betchet, for 2 excellent presentations. I think I was supposed to take a break in between both of them, but we were running a little. We were a little long and wanted to make sure everybody got a break before that. So I appreciate that. you went along with that. But I do, for those that are watching. I want to be really, I think we have to be very sensitive to the fact that not everybody is a highway safety expert. Uh, so to the extent that we could not use acronyms. I think that would be helpful. For those watching, FCW is forward collision warning. ACC is adaptive cruise control. AEB is automatic emergency braking, and A DAS is advanced driver assist systems, and then level 2 L2 is level 2 technologies, which is partial automation. So I just want to make sure that people at home can follow along so to the extent that you could not use acronyms. I think that would be really helpful for all of us, including us, I meant. Um, uh, Mr. Minat, if you could pull up a video, but hold it 1st. don't uh don't play it yet. Uh we uh uh, Dr. Bechich, sorry, I think I said Mr. before, doctor, you definitely earn that. You mentioned that experience shapes behavior. Uh experience shapes behavior um, and attitudes of drivers, but also, um, how something is advertised, I think, has an impact research shows that. Um, and how drivers are educated. Uh, I can tell you that for me personally, when I purchased one, 2 different vehicles that have level 2 uh, partial automation, I was not given a tutorial at the dealership. I was, I was sent off on my way and called 3 or 4 weeks later by somebody that said, we'll give you a gift certificate to gift card to something if you come back and we'll teach you about your vehicle. In that time a month went by. Um, and of course, did I go back? No, because I've already you know, checked it all out. Uh, I don't know that many people read their manuals uh, or read the fine print online. I will say just looking at Ford's, um, I went to their website, and it was Ford, Blue Cruise, as a hands-free driver assistant feature designed to help make driving easier, more enjoyable, and less stressful. Can you play that video, please? You guys okay back there? Yep. Okay. Heads free highway driving for a hands on life. Ford Blue Cruise. Look, I've seen worse ads, but I have to tell you, if you are, please do not pretend that you are conducting a symphony orchestra, closing your eyes with your children, then the backseat while your, your blue cruise is driving down the highway. Uh, I do think how we advertise has a big impact on uh, people who operate these vehicles and how we talk about it. If you just look at, and I'll go back to how Blue Cruise talks about, uh, their vehicles, a pair, or Ford, apparently you're supposed to go to the website where it says Blue Cruise is a driver assist feature and does not replace safe driving or driver's attention, judgment, and need to control the vehicle. Yet at the same time. They are advertising, that you can easily just begin to pretend you're conducting a symphony orchestra while partially closing your eyes at times during the driving operation, with your children in the back. I think that's irresponsible. That's not how we should be advertising these technologies. I looked at other ads, and across the board, it's not just for Ford. It's others as well. And then apparently people have to go to the manual to read, you're responsible for keeping your eyes on the roads at all times. The system is designed to be an aid and does not leave your responsibility. To drive with due care and attention, failure to follow instruction could result in the loss of control of your vehicle, personal, injury or death. How many people actually read? Their manual. I would love to know that. Does anyone know that? Is there research out there? I read my manual because I'm a safety professional. My guess is we all do. Maybe some of us don't. But nobody, most people. Don't read it. Uh, so I do think, you know, beyond behavior, it is about how you talk about it. It is about how you educate those who purchase it, which is, it comes at the very beginning with that memogram. It's a good point, Sharon. How about when you ran a car? Exactly. I did lock myself out of a vehicle and not know how to get into that Tesla we tried. Oh boy. On a rental. Yeah. Rent a car can be tough. I want to focus in on the alerting time for the driver monitoring systems, when they detect off-road glances, and what amount of time is most appropriate before an alert is issued. So 1st of all, is there any amount of time for any vehicle on the road today where it is acceptable for the driver not to be focused on the road? As a safety professional, we could not say that any interval other than 0 would be acceptable. Exactly. I think that's a baseline and we're going to start this discussion. There's no amount of time where it is acceptable for drivers of any vehicle to be looking away from the roadway, especially at the high speeds. we're talking about with these 2 accidents. As far as NITSA National Highway Traffic Safety admissions administration, driver distraction guidelines go, which I will note are voluntary and not regulatory. What do they recommend as the maximum amount of time drivers should be engaged in tasks that take their eyes off the road. So you're referring to their guidelines for design of the in vehicle systems and they are based on the maximum of 2 seconds of gaze away from the forward roadway. 2 seconds there. And as far as the euro, new car assessment programs, performance requirements for L2, level 2 driver monitoring systems, how long does the euro, new car assessment programs, regulations allow for off-road glances before a visual and auditory alert must be issued? So there, uh, timing is 3 seconds for the onset of the 1st alert. Okay, so we have 3 seconds there. So we have Dr. Betcher, our expert from the NTSB saying, no amount of off-road, no amount of time, off-road glances are acceptable. We have NITSA saying off-road glances should be kept to less than 2 seconds. We have the euro and cap, which requires a bimodal alert after 3 seconds of off-road glances. In the Ford's Blue Cruise system, How long did we find it take for the driver monitoring system to trigger a bimodal alert? So Ford has selected the 52nd interval for the onset of the 1st alert, but um, should mention that the Ford's 5 seconds is among the, if not the shortest in the industry in the US. Okay. So we got two, three, five, seconds. How far does a passenger vehicle travel at 70 miles per hour in 5 seconds, do you know? It's about 90 feet. square? No, it's about 519 feet. Yeah. A little over 500 feet, almost 2 football fields. That's the way I like to think of it. Given this, do you think it is appropriate for Ford's driver monitoring system to issue bimodal alerts sooner than the existing 5 seconds? That's a very good question. So I mentioned the Ford's timing compared to the rest of the industry, but I should also say that we all disengage all the time. Hopefully for very brief periods of time. We are simply not capable of prolonged sustained attention to any single task. And but uh A lot can happen in 5 seconds or in 3 seconds. Clearly, as these 2 crashes have shown. And a safety professional, we cannot say that any gaze away from the roadway other than 0 is safe enough. But we have to acknowledge the feasibility and then the issue of usability and user acceptance. The staff's position is that these factors, including the timing of the 1st alerts, including any modalities and subsequent alerts, would be defined in the performance standards that staff has proposed that NITSA develops. Thank you for that, doctor. So I got a little bit of time. Can you briefly touch on the importance of multimodal alerting and how the sensory, Virtual, visual, and auditory alerts can collectively help return drivers attention to the roadway. So, Nitza has done, along with the industry has done a lot of work specifically in that area, a couple of decades ago, during the development of forward collision warning systems, to determine the appropriate modalities, and the primary basic finding is, uh, bimodel, or at least by model warnings are much more effective in orienting drivers attention than uh, single modality, especially when it an auditory component. Great. Thank you.
My time's up. Remember Chapman? Uh yes. Oh, thank you. Thank you, chair. We, uh, we know, especially from experience in commercial aviation, that automation complacency is a real phenomenon. However, in aviation, that phenomenon is well understood. It's explicitly trained for. And it is carefully managed. And we still have problems in aviation from time to time. In contrast, level 2 vehicle systems are deployed to the general public. And they're often marketed as comfort features rather than as safety features. And we just saw the uh, uh, the Ford uh, ad with the uh, nice lady uh, practicing her conducting. By the way, I often make light of the fact that my college degree was in music. But in fact, I do have a bachelor of fine arts and music. And so, as a qualified expert, I am here to tell you, that nice lady needs a lot more practice. Um I remember, remember Graham and I joined NTSB a little over 6 years ago, and our very 1st meeting was the Mountain View crash, where a Tesla SUV, operating in partial automation, crashed into a damaged crash attenuator. There was evidence of automation complacency in that investigation. And that experience, and what I learned from that investigation continues to shape my concern that these systems can lead drivers to overrely on automation and disengage from the driving task. And this investigation demonstrates that further. Has Nitza published any guidelines for the safe implementation of any guidelines at all for safe implementation of level 2 systems in the 6 years since Mountain View, since the Mountain View investigation. And this is primary focus has been on higher levels of automation. So robotaxis and higher levels. Well, the issue with partial automation or level 2 systems has not received anywhere near the attention, and there have not been any guidelines, uh, that could be used by the industry as to utilize the lessons, learned to examine the best approaches. And the to avoid the pitfalls of the of the implementation. Thank you. And I recognize this as a somewhat subjective question, but are there any areas where DOT or NITSA has improved in oversight of in its oversight of partial automation? So With partial automation, we, and as our staff and as a board, and uh, Chairman Muhammad, he discussed the benefits of other advanced driver assistance systems. Vehicles with partial automation are built on other supporting systems, including automatic emergency braking, forward collision warning and other systems that have shown to provide safety benefits. So they have, uh, so that would be the benefit, including the NITSA's recent mandate for requiring AB systems on passenger views. Okay, thank you. I appreciate that. Ford did not make vehicles with level 2 capabilities. At the time we reiterated a recommendation in Mountain View, uh, for 6 automakers to develop more effective methods of driver engagement than steering wheel torque alone. Um, while vehicles are in partial automation. So Ford deserves credit for incorporating both steering wheel torque and driver gauge monitoring, independent of our recommendation. And I also want to note, too, that one of the issues in the mountain view, uh, investigation was what I believe is called operational design, uh domain. And at that, and then that, this is essentially the driving environment in which the automation is designed to function. The problem at that point in time was that determination was essentially left up to the driver. Um, I think Ford deserves credit here for seeking to address that that issue through what they call, I believe it's blue zone, essentially, the geo fencing of where these technologies are available. So I do think that there is, um, there's some reason here to, to, uh, to give forward credit for seeking to address some of these concerns. Again, they're doing so, um, in an environment where there's, there's really no standard that, uh, has been set forth. And I, and I, I believe again that NITSA and DOT have fallen short and not providing that sort of standard or guidance. Uh, how do we, uh, how do we think the driver, uh, monitoring system on the crash involved Ford vehicles here? How did they perform relative to the Euro-endcap driver monitoring performance criteria? So, a couple of limitations that I discussed in my presentations. Uh, are addressed in the Euro and cap performance protocols, uh, including, which does include detection of a use of a phone. It does include, uh, examining the driver's prolonged case pattern to, uh, be able to identify these, uh, very quick forward and then longer off off-road uh, glances. So uh 0 and cap, uh, uh, performance protocols and the requirements, uh, are higher. I should mention that even if the implement limitations that we have just discussed are addressed in this, uh, The camera-based DMS will not eliminate old driver disengagement. Uh, we all, as I mentioned earlier, we all uh, disengage all uh, all the time. Thank you. Whether it's cognitive or more tangible distraction. Thank you. thank you for that. Sure.
Sorry to go over. You're fine. Uh, member DeLu. Uh, yes, a little different path to questioning for me, if you don't mind. I was doing some research on it. It says of July of 2025, Dr. Bechic, Ford reported that users had logged over 2000000 hours of hands-free driving, covering over 500 miles, uh, in the US of Canada. So other potential safety benefits. From the LT system? Uh, That's a, An excellent question and a very challenging question. Uh, the benefits that I mentioned earlier, uh, on these vehicles stem primarily from the technologies such as automatic emergency braking, forward collision warning. If the question is whether operating a vehicle in partial automation mode is safer than operating that same vehicle in manual mode. That is very challenging because it requires controlling for all factors related to driving environments, to human related factors, and there are many, and they are very complex. Uh, The IHS reports, uh, recently compared vehicles, With L2 capabilities, uh, to similarly equipped vehicles without uh, L2 capabilities, finding no difference in crash rate, uh, in the next performance by Mr. Squire, we will discuss the issue of data, and uh, what would be needed in terms of the improving the SGO database to begin to answer that question. So I guess to follow up on that one. Do we get reports or do we have reports of potential, I call, dear missus, from my aviation world? When accents were prevented, because of the L2. Again, in the next presentation by Mr. Squire will discuss the SGO database and the limitations of that, but that the database does not include near misses. If someone's using the L2 system on the highway at 60 miles an hour and falls asleep, what will the card do? So the system is designed to provide a series of escalating alerts, starting with the 1st one, if the driver continues, not giving appropriate response, it would, the system would eventually initiate a vehicle, slow down procedure, where the vehicle would come to either a near stop or a complete stop. Okay. Um, So I, this is a little bit of a hypothetical question. Maybe it'll stop for you, the doctor, not for you, doctor, but if the drivers of these crashes, had been constantly mounting the road, as we've all been talking about, as a form manager suggests, Do you believe they would have detected the stop vehicles on the roadway? I think particularly I probably should focus on the San Antonio one. Sure I can answer that. Um, I think the most obvious one is that the witness traveling ahead of the Ford avoided the crash. Um, she was particularly focused on the roadway because she was looking to exit. Um, so yes, we definitely believe that there was available evidence that the Hondo was illuminated, um, that there was, uh, there was adequate roadway lighting, and the driver had a clear line of sight of about 1300 feet, which translates to about 11 to 12 seconds to identify a stop vehicle and make an evasive maneuver. So we believe there was sufficient time for that, had he been paying attention to the forward roadway. I think to follow up on that, though, as we just mentioned earlier, as human beings, we can't constantly monitor 100% all the time. We just can't. I think we can, but we can't. Uh, so the reality is, is that driver that did avoid it had just looked for a momentary to the radio or looked at passing sign, looking for exit. They could have potentially hit the car too, right? I mean, it was just fortunate that that particular driver was looking for the exit side. Yeah, I think it's difficult to speculate on that, but, um, you know, I would agree that, you know, anytime that, uh, there is always the chance that, uh, glances off the road can come in inopportune times, but, having said that, I think your best bet is to pay forward attention in the roadway. Of course, the systems that we've been talking about are systems that can aid a driver in circumstances where they might not be 100%. We typically look at stacking those systems together so that the driver has a safe speed, intelligence speed assist systems, whether that's a passover, an active system, and then systems like automatic emergency braking, that if the driver doesn't detect the hazard, that this vehicle is within a speed that those types of systems can activate, and if not totally avoid the crash, then at least slow the vehicle to either allow the driver more time to take an evasive action or mitigate a crash if it does occur. Uh, real quick, if I would, on the automatic uh, emergency braking, uh, I happen to have a card that's got one of those. A lot of folks do. A lot of us try to get it deactivated because we'll try to break it 40 miles an hour. I, the car I have, if I go to the parking garage of the great, at 20 miles an hour, it will automatically stop with an ice skid braking, basically. And so I think that that system is not enough to rely on to save your butt. Yes, certainly, that's a driver assistance system. And as Dr. Hum mentioned, we want the driver to be fully engaged. Um, I'd also note that the new role making does address false positives. And so there's testing included with that new rule making that'll become effective in 2029 that'll address the concerns that you're talking about as well. Perfect. I like to follow up with you later on that one. I've got a car they can use. Thank you. Thank you. I actually have also experienced automatic emergency braking and I believe it saves a life. It did in my case. And it did with my daughter. Uh, so there are situations where it picks up, uh, station objects. I will be in a neighborhood and uh, turn left on a curve and it will pick up a, uh, a vehicle ahead of me and it beeps ahead of time, right? But, uh, overall, I think it's uh, showed incredible uh, safety benefits. But as you note, these are combined technologies. Individual technologies have pretty good safety benefits, AEB for collision warning with where, uh, this board has been extremely supportive of both over time. Uh, I personally feel that for me, adaptive cruise control is very beneficial uh, for ensuring safety. I said it, I uh, monitor, but I also know that I'm staying at that speed all the time on the speed limit. Um So uh with that said, Why do we issue safety recommendations? Miss Poland. The NTSB issues safety recommendations to recipients that we believe can take action to either prevent or mitigate crashes that we've seen through our investigations or safety deficiencies that have been revealed through the investigative process. Yeah, so our safety record, you know, I always say, and I said this in my opening, that our investigations are really the 1st step. But real safety change comes when our recommendations are implemented. If they're not implemented, what is the point? Right? We need to be taken seriously. We are the ones on scene trying to improve safety all the time constantly, and I'm looking at the issues we're talking about today, driver disengagement, over reliance on automation, drivers moving from operators of a vehicle to monitors of a vehicle, and we're not good at that. In fact, the research shows that the more we're used to that technology, the more we disengage. With that technology, because now we're just comfortable with it. And we find other ways around it. Um, so over and over, we've issued recommendations since 2016 when we did Williston, Williston, Mountain View, Dell, Del Rey Beach, Culver City, you name it. Uh, I mean, I'm looking at development of standards for driver monitoring systems. We said well back. SAE level 2 partial automation systems require that the driver monitor the highway and remain able to take control of the vehicle at any time. The success of a level 2 system depends on a driver completing a monitoring task. That requires sustained detention. However, humans generally perform poorly in the role of monitors. So, one question I have is, do manufacturers, expectations align with drivers real world use, and do they test for that? Do you test for the worst possible scenario? The worst possible driver? Um, I would say, no, uh, we, a step notes in the report, an example of, uh, a small finding from a, uh, an excellent study involving a different automaker that uses a monitoring driver applies steering wheel torque as a primary method of determining driver engagement, and in the, that naturalistic study found that drivers receive on average an alert for disengagement every 3 miles. So there's a huge disconnect between what they, in this case, the manufacturer expected and how drivers actually use it in the real world. So we recommended a while back that NITSO work with SAE to develop performance standards for driver monitoring. What was SAA's response or at least per nitza? Um Oh we didn't not receive the response from the SA. Uh. No, we didn't. I said pernitza. Oh Bernitza. So when discussing this with Nitson, it's uh, uh, informed us that they did not have a working relationship with the essay on this, but they felt comfortable pursuing research on this topic on their own. Uh, and Nitz also apparently informed us that they weren't interested, that SAA was not interested in pursuing performance standards, just not interested. Yet we continue to investigate crashes involving fatalities, resulting in fatalities and injuries. It's really quite tragic when our recommendations are not implemented. Thank God we exist because we continue to fight for safety. But you know what? It's not just up to NITZA. It's not just up to SAE. The manufacturers have a major role here. I hope they're listening. I hope you're listening because I tell you, oftentimes I hear, oh, it's the person's fault. The driver disengaged. They were impaired. They were distracted. You know what? Your technologies help with that. Lead to that. Lead to misuse. are part of the misuse, and you need to take action. Uh, Vice chairman Grant. Thank you, chair. I love technology. People know that of me. I love using it, but I won't use it unless I understand the limitations of it because there's no perfect system out there. We all know that in this business. So I want to talk about Blue Cruises limitations. As it relates to speeding particularly excessive speeding. When hands required blue cruise is enabled, what is the maximum cruise be, the adaptive cruise control can be set too. It is 113 miles per hour, 113 miles an hour. And when is and what is the maximum cruise speed, the adaptive cruise control can be set to when hands-free blue cruise is enabled? That would be 80 miles, bro. 80 miles. Okay, to clarify, this is not intelligent adaptive cruise control. We are talking about here. Can you explain how the intelligent act of cruise adaptive cruise control system differs from the passive one that allows for those maximum speeds we just discussed? Okay, and refrain from using any acronyms. Sorry. But, uh, for its intelligent, adaptive cruise control is a Ford's name of a system called active intelligence speed systems, which is more of a generic name. And uh, intelligent speed assistance on its own. The passive component alerts a driver when exceeding the speed limit. Active intelligence speed assistance may uh, precludes the vehicle from exceeding the speed limit, and it could be done through a variety of ways either through uh, more of a haptic way, pushing the accelerator pedal or through uh, an actual uh, governor that precludes a vehicle from uh, uh, going above the speed limit. So is there any restrictions on speeding when intelligent, adaptive cruise control is engaged? So Ford's implementation of the intelligence, adaptive cruise control includes a tolerance level of 20 miles per hour. 20 over the speed limit, correct? Okay. And is an intelligent, adaptive cruise control required to be engaged when hands required blue cruise is activated. Uh no uh it's not required. Either AC adaptive cruise control or intelligent is adaptive cruise control needs to be engaged. And how about when hands-free blue cruise is activated. The same rules. Same rule. Okay.
So theoretically, in Ford's existing Blue Cruise system today, a car could travel through an area designated for hands-free Blue Cruise, known as a blue zone, at up to 80 miles per hour because intelligent adaptive cruise control is not required to be engaged. Oh correct. Yeah, I know this is getting confusing, isn't it? What if that section of roadway was a work zone that had a reduced speed limit? Say, for example, there's a blue zone, designated for a section of roadway that normally has a 65 mile per hour speed limit. If that same section of roadway becomes a work zone with a reduced speed limit to 55 miles per hour, Hands-free blue cruise can still be engaged at 80 miles per hour traveling through that work zone, because the intelligent adaptive cruise control. is not required to be engaged and detect the surrounding speed limit. Is that correct? Yes, with the caveat, there are a number of other factors, uh, such as work zone related changes to the roadway that might negate the suitability of the roadway for uh, hands-free blue cruise, but regarding the speed. Uh, your question is correct. And with hands required Blue Cruise. That is not limited to blue zones or other specified sections of roadways. Is that correct? Oh correct. Okay, so a driver with the hands required Blue Cruise enabled on, that same hypothetical section of roadway, previously discussed, could travel 110 miles per hour in the 55 mile an hour work zone because intelligent, adaptive cruise control is not required to be engaged. Yes, I believe so. That is correct. Is there any roadway in this country where it is acceptable to travel 113 miles per hour? There is no reason for any vehicle to travel to those speeds on public roads. And even if an individual wants or feels the need to speed, should the vehicle assists them in going more than 100 miles per hour? Speeding is a safety concern whether operating vehicle manually or with an aid of ACC. If a driver wants to speed excessively, they will do so manually. Um, even if limited by the maximum cruise speed, But at least with ACC enabled, there may be a potential for the system to provide some safety benefits. So I don't. I don't see any safety benefit in that in a system allowing or helping assist them do that. Thank you, chair. Yep, I agree with that. Remember Chapman? Just a couple of uh, Technical questions, and you may know the answers to these, you may not. Do we know at what speeds and under what conditions, the automatic emergency braking systems on these vehicles was no longer reliably able to mitigate a crash? That is probably too technical an engineering question to determine the exact threshold at which perhaps the system would detect a hazard 80% of the time or 90% of the time. But I think just generally, it's safe to say that as the speed increases. The reliability of the system, the capability of the system, to detect and then mitigate, goes down. Correct, particularly with including other factors such as if it's nighttime, if the hazard is stationary versus moving. So I want to suggest, and you can comment one way or another, that it's also, um, it's unrealistic to expect that a driver would understand those performance limits, limits of automatic emergency braking, and some of the other technologies that are available. It's really not. It's not realistic to think that a driver would understand those limitations. Would you agree? Uh, I agree. Uh, uh, those are systems that assist a driver in a specific situation is discreetly. Whether a driver understands the conditions what, uh, during which the system can perform much more effectively than others. Yeah, and again, my concern here is the overreliance on these systems without really understanding what the limitations are. Um And with respect to, um, And and with respect to speed, and I think this is really the same question, just to ask another way. I don't think that drivers are clearly warned, and maybe they are in the owner's manual, but again, you know, I don't know the extent to which people can be relied upon to read the owner's manual, but the extent in which the capabilities of the system may not scale with the higher speeds that they're able to set, 80 miles an hour and higher. Those systems, again, the reliability goes down as that speed goes up. I just don't think drivers understand that, and I don't think that they're adequately warned of it. If they are, it's in the context of an owner's manual. And again, we don't know the extent to which people actually, uh, uh, actually read or understand the owner's manual. Um, just, just some observations, uh, no further questions in this area chair. Thank you, Ms. uh, member, Delu. I'm gonna guess I'll follow up a little bit with uh, Member Chapman's questionnaire. So, unfortunately, my background of aviation, the limitations that they refer to, we actually memorize all the limitations. Most of most airplanes. We actually read the manual from front to back on every airplane you go to. just kind of standard procedure for most pilots. And so on this one here that had brought up on my colleagues that, you know, if you bought a new car, you'd have that information, but what happens if you buy a used car? Uh, or as was, uh, as mentioned, like, um, the vice chair mentioned about, you know, you rent a car. I've got a good friend that rented one and, you know, there's no manual in the glove compartment. So, um, have we considered any of those situations because as we get the student technology, it's it's going to get better. Uh, like I said, my grandkids are going to have this stuff probably, but they buy a used car, which is probably their 1st car by used car. They may not have this. So just, because I looked on the line for Ford, and I could find nothing in there that talks about the limitations of the Blue Cruise technology. I see a lot of commercials like the cheerwoman showed, but I didn't see much stuff. So how are people supposed to get this? Do you know? So uh regarding the limitations, we mentioned the uh, vehicle owner's manual, I believe the Ford also has a, a, some video material regarding the general functionality, an operational Blue Cruise, which does describe driver's responsibilities. Regarding the benefits of education and training, there certainly can be uh, many. But there are also substantial limitations when it comes to non-commercial drivers. Uh, It could be in something as basic as feasibility as to if someone is purchasing a vehicle, whether it's new or used. uh Dealerships are not going to require a driver to go undergo the training and pass the training before selling them a vehicle. So there are those limitations. However, our focus is, uh, in the recommendation to USDOT is to develop a guidelines, because even without, even with initial orientation of the dealership, whatever they are told, only after the driver begins operating their new vehicle, they, um, develop their own mental model as to how the system operates, what what its limitations are, what the capabilities are. And that is also when they might get into danger of becoming too comfortable in certain situations because the system has always performed, well, in those situations until one day, they do not. Our focus is on the design of a system. 1st of all, from the human factors perspective, um, should communicate to the driver, the proper use of the system, and limit the opportunities for driver error. And when it comes to the broader issue of maintaining driver engagement, while camera-based DMS is certainly one of them. It cannot be the only one design of the system that's, uh, implementation of the system that by design promotes driver engagement would represent more, um, more holistic and uh, complete, um, approach to maintaining driver's attention. So, It leads back to a question of the work zone. So I believe I don't know if I read how long the work zone was there, but I think it was at least 3 or 4 months, the one in Philadelphia. So, uh, being relied on a blue cruise, I'm going down the road or any level L2 type automation, all of a sudden the work zone has been there for three, four, 5 months. How often is the database updated in the Blue Crows world? to know that, I mean, I'm feeling pretty good. It's been doing the speed limit the whole time and all of a sudden it does it, the speed limit. So, is there a, I won't say standard, but how often does that get updated, that so called database? Um, so you're, I believe you're talking about the mapping. So, uh, mapping, the high definition, mapping is provided by an external vendor, but it is used as a base of the, of providing the road bay geometry. The forward facing camera provides real world, real-time information of any updates to whether it's works on related changes to the environment, on which then the suitability as a blue zone road is made. So the map that you refer to is that is the 1st step and then forward facing camera is the 2nd step of verification of the roadway environment. So at Hoffen is the mapping updated. We don't have that information. We were informed by Ford that the mapping that the Ford that the Maki had was the latest available map on that vehicle, regarding work zone specific. We don't know whether included the work zone sign, but we do know that it included 55 miles speed limit, so the speed limit was not updated. Okay, thank you. Thank you. The Ford Maki owner's manual. Notes that forward collision warning and automatic emergency braking systems can detect stationary vehicles and are designed to operate at speeds above 3 miles per hour up to the vehicle's maximum speed. With a 50 mile per hour limit for detection of pedestrians and bicyclists. The manual cautions that A, B, performance can degrade due to numerous factors including nighttime conditions. Uh, Do you think owners have a good understanding of what the limitations are of forward collision warning and automatic emergency breaking in their vehicles? Many engineers don't, so I wouldn't expect the owners to. That's right Um, along those lines, uh, I do have some questions about a recent, uh, rule making, but 1st before I get to the rule making, Nitza, I, I, HS and Euro NCAP, have been assessing the performance of forward collision warning and automatic emergency braking using different testing protocols. For 3 typical rear end crash scenarios, encountering a stopped vehicle in the same travel lane and countering a slower moving lead vehicle, following a vehicle that accelerates after a period of time. The NITSA stopped vehicle testing protocol is limited to the, a maximum vehicle speed of 45 miles per hour, uh, for forward collision warning and 25 miles per hour for automatic emergency braking, IHS, 25 miles per hour for automatic emergency braking, euro end cap is 49.7 miles per hour. Had the vehicle, had one of these vehicles been traveling at the posted speed limit, I know they were significantly over, above 70. Um, the system likely would have kicked in, assuming it wasn't turned off. Uh, and assuming conditions were met. Uh, in May 2024, and it's a mandated performance requirements for forward collision warning and automatic, automatic emergency braking systems and passenger vehicles. What I want to know is the mandate said uh, it was essentially a no contact rule. 62 at speeds up to, it would have to avoid collisions with lead vehicles that speeds up to 62 miles per hour and to activate at speeds up to 90.1 miles per hour. The requirement applies to nighttime conditions when using low beam headlights. The mandate further includes requirements for pedestrian detection and passenger vehicles would have to comply with the mandate by September 1st, 2029 if it went into effect. Uh, I'm wondering what the, and I have to say, because I have had automatic emergency braking kick in. I um What? Concern, does it raise for kicking in, are there any other safety concerns for kicking in at 62 miles per hour or 90 miles per hour? It's pretty jarring. Uh, and the reason why I'm asking, and I know in this case, you would have, it would have to slow farther back. It would have to take into account, it can't be an immediate stop. Uh, but have we, has there been research on that? Or did Nitzel look at that as part of their proposal? What did they look at? So Nitza has examined the, uh, capabilities of current generation, AB, the top performance, and projected in the future, as to whether, In the future, the capabilities would automakers would be able to meet those capabilities. I believe that Nitza stated that one automaker may meet those requirements today. I'm not sure which one that that would be, but that was their position. I know, uh, we are aware that across the industry, they have concerns about being able to meet those requirements. Uh, I believe, uh, a member, Dulu mentioned the issue of uh, false activations. In Nitsa's proceeding, notice of proposed rulemaking, they proposed removing a test for uh, false activation, but based on our comments that they, those should, should be included, because they are very important, especially when vehicles are following closely behind. The final rule does retain the test for false activation. Great. Thank you very much, uh, vice chairman Graham. I'm trying to get used to it. Yeah, I know. I understand. All right, thank you. I want to talk about the San Antonio crash in the surrounding circumstances of that. Let's see, we had a vehicle that was stopped in the middle lane of a highway. It was a well-let roadway with no significant weather, great changes, unexpected roadway conditions, or other obstacles in the area. And uh, we, um, classified the traffic uh, at that position and before as light or sparse. And the Ford was in hands-free blues control, blue cruise system activated at the time of the crash. Is that all correct quickly summarized? Yes, those details. Those are correct. So how is it that despite otherwise favorable conditions, none of Ford's systems were able to detect a stationary vehicle that we believe had their hazard lights illuminated in a well-lit area of the roadway with sparse traffic? Detection of stationary vehicle as a hazard is extremely challenging, and it has been very challenging since the 1st generation of forward collision warning systems, when those systems would reliably and every single time detect and overpass as a hazard. So it is not the issue of detecting that there is an object on the road, but rather determining that it is a vehicle that it is in a travel lane that is, uh, uh, that represents a hazard. Okay. So let's talk about the testing protocols for these vehicles. And according to the new car assessment programs, testing protocols, for a stopped lead vehicle condition, which was the condition we were talking about here in San Antonio. What are the maximum vehicle speeds required for testing forward collision warning and automatic emergency braking? Generally, about 45 miles per hour, for the forward collision warning, and with the A, B B 25? In the U.S. 24? In the U.S. Okay, how about the insurance institute for highway safety? 25 for 25 emergency break. Okay. And then the Euro new car assessment program. What speeds are we talking about there? I believe 40 miles per hour. Recently, IHS has started has increased the testing protocol for AB to go up to 40 miles per hour. Okay. So, so to clarify, we have no evidence that the Ford's Ford collision warning or automatic emergency braking system activated in the San Antonio crash. Is that correct? We have evidence that they did not. They did not. So now Ford told us that they were, they knew the limitations of the AEB technology prior to the investigation. Can you explain what Ford knew about the limitations of their automatic emergency braking system at high speeds? So they have described to us and that's and this applies in their belief and in our belief across the industry that the challenge is with the deduction of stationary objects as higher speeds, because the uh, confidence level that that, that vehicle that's detected object is a threat, is never high enough to engage automatic emergency braking, because as with false activations, the false activation of automatic emergency braking can be potentially very dangerous. And that is different to false activation of forward collision warning, which might end up being only a nuisance alert. So how did Ford communicate these limitations to vehicle owners? Up through the vehicle owner's manual through the manual, okay? Do you believe these systems should be allowed to be engaged at speed, exceeding those that were tested, especially with the known limitations? Um, the Blue Cruise or the automatic emergency braking? Either. It's, it speeds that they're not tested at. Do you think you should be able to have these systems be used at that? So AB, uh, could provide benefits in mitigating a crash even at higher speeds. Uh, but those would much more, would be much more likely to occur when detecting a moving vehicle ahead. Okay. So as a broader point, I think it's a huge issue that advanced driver assistance systems, and this likely extends well beyond forward, that have these significant limitations that are not clearly communicated to or well known by the public. If I were a driver and my vehicle was equipped with automatic emergency braking, I would assume that an advanced driver system, which is what was, what these are billed as, would be able to detect a stop vehicle in the middle of a highway with a hazard lights on in a well-lit area. The bottom line is, I think this should be a wake up call to the manufacturers and the regulators alike, to step up testing protocols, protocols for these systems, to improve their performance, as well as better communication with vehicle owners about the significant limitations. Thank you. Number Chapman. No further questions in this area. Thanks.
Member Delu? One last couple questions for me, and by the way, I 100% agree with Vice chair Graham. The regulators. I have a question, a little bit to follow up on the mapping thing. So I did some research on the Blue Cruise. So if I bought a new car, new Ford, for instance, they tell me the subscription is good for 90 days. If I want to go beyond 90 days, I got to pay and it's a one time fee, which is pretty expensive, or I go buy yearly fee. Um, so let's say I get the car and after 90 days, I don't get the subscription, but then 6 months later, I decide, okay, I'm not going to let my son Peter drive it. I'm going to drive it now. Um, when I get the subscription, Does the mapping then update automatically? How does that work with the mapping piece versus the subscription? I believe the approach would be the same is that the mapping, any updates would be sent to any vehicles that have a subscription, subscription. And let's say I decided I'm not going to do it anymore, so I'm driving on the freeway with my blue cruise, and then my subscription ends at midnight, I suspect. I don't know if they'll be midnight. Does the blue cruise turn off or does it keep working or how does, what's the, for the operator who's driving it? Because maybe somebody forgot to pay the bill. Is there is it pretty knowledgeable that the Blue Cruise is not working? I I'm not certain, but I would expect that the same approach would be as if DMS is unable to detect your case, meaning that the necessary requirements for the operation are not met, so the vehicle would initiate a slowdown, uh, uh, process, whether it would require you to follow the, uh, to take full control of the vehicle, if you do not, it would initiate a slowdown procedure to bring the vehicle to stop. I'm just curious, this driver monitoring system, DMS, of that acronym is, uh, if this is all spelled on also the limitations in the manual, because, you know, you, the subscription, I thought was kind of expensive, so some people might decide not to pay for it anymore, at least for a couple months, and, Then it might have an effect on the blue cruise, may not be able to engage it, which is what I would hope would happen, but, Do we know that for sure? Is there any? The limitations of a driver monitoring system are discussed in the in the vehicle owner's manual and specifically things that the driver should avoid wearing to prevent to avoid situations in which DMS is unable to detect driver's case. And pay your monthly subscription. For instance. Yeah. Okay, thank you. That's job. I appreciate the info. Other questions. Anything else for this part? Okay, Mr. Squire, you are up for your presentation. Thank you. All right. Okay, I guess I'll start to say. Well, good afternoon. For staff's final presentation, I'll discuss the safety assessment elements of partial automation systems, including data recording, vehicle manufacturer's awareness of crashes involving those systems, and Nitz's standing general order for the reporting of incidents involving partial automation. I'll also discuss previous safety recommendations pertaining to data recording. Since the federal regulation pertaining to event data recorders, It's part 563 does not include any ADAS, uh, advanced driver assistance system elements or parameters that indicate whether partial automation was even engaged. For its recording of data related to these functions was voluntary. The Ford Machi vehicles involved in these crashes had 2 main in vehicle modules that captured data pertaining to Blue Cruz, the driver monitoring system and the related functions. These vehicles had telematic or wireless data transmission capabilities that included continuous and event-based data. Although there was some overlap of the recorded information between these data sources, we found several insufficiencies in data capture that limited a more detailed understanding of the crashes. And the San Antonio crash, the Blue Cruise module did not capture the crash at all, so information about the sensor's potential detection of the stationary Honda, and the images from the forward facing camera were not recorded. In Philadelphia crash, although the Blue Cruise module captured the crash, it was designed to record only 2 seconds of pre-crash data, which limited a more comprehensive assessment of the movement of the genesis that was detected ahead of it. Additionally, the telematic data collection program that transmits continuous blue cruise related information did not record any portion of the crash trip. Furthermore, telematic data collection programs are designed so that they do not include parameters indicating that a crash had occurred such as an airbag deployment. What we noted limitations and insufficiencies with data recording in the 2 crashes. Ford was not required to record any of this information, without a regulation, critical information, such as L2 activation, and hazard detection, remains inconsistent and inaccessible to local law enforcement, safety investigators, regulators, and the manufacturers. For these crashes, Ford had learned of the San Antonio crash nearly 2 weeks after it occurred through a post on a Ford Machi online forum monitored by Ford staff. St
For the Philadelphia Crash Ford, learned of the event about a month after it occurred. In this case, the investigating law enforcement agency, Pennsylvania State Police, had contacted an NTSB investigator inquiring about their experience with the Blue Cruise system. When our office contacted Ford to obtain more information about the crash, we learned that Ford was not aware that it had occurred. In 2021, Netsa issued a standing general order requiring manufacturers to report certain crashes that included L2, level 2 equipped vehicles where the system was engaged or attempted to be engaged within 30 seconds of a crash. The SGO's stated purpose is to monitor manufacture compliance with safety defect obligations, collect crash data to identify potential safety concerns. The agency published, publicly publishes select incident information. The standing general order reflects Nitz's recognition of a potential safety risk and provides a mechanism for safety assessment of partial automation through incident data. However, it has significant limitations. Specifically, there's no advanced driver assistance system data recording or automatic crash reporting requirement when a level 2 system was active. to fulfill the reporting requirements. A manufacturer must 1st be aware that a crash involved their vehicle being operated in partial automation mode. Nitz's standing general order database illustrates these limitations. Since the implemented implementation in 2021, 9 automakers have reported fewer than 10 incidents each, and no automaker other than one has reported more than 100. Our last review forwarded reported 35 incidents. Well, Tesla had reported more than 2400 representing 85% of the reported incidents. The source of manufacture awareness is notable. Although telematics was the most common means of identifying reported incidents, nearly all telematics-based reports came from Tesla. These, uh, these reported numbers are meaningful, considering that for the 2023 model year, more than half the vehicles produced had some form of level 2 system. The San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes reveal limitations with the design of Ford's Telematics Data collection programs, which is, which did not transmit direct crash parameters such as airbag deployment. These limitations restrict the automaker's ability to identify relevant crashes and comply with the requirements of the Nitz's standing general order. Delays in Ford's awareness of San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes, and reporting disparities across manufacturers in both the number of incidents reported, and the information sources for the reports, show that the standing general order database does not likely reflect the full extent of level 2 related crashes or the factors that contribute to these crashes. And without standardized systems for automatically notifying automakers of relevant crashes, reporting of applicable incidents will remain incomplete while also limiting a manufacturer's ability to investigate the crashes and potential safety risks. Staff has proposed that nets require automakers to equip their vehicles with capability to process telematic notifications of crashes that meet the reporting requirements of the standing general order for level 2 systems. As a result of the 2016 investigation, involving a vehicle operating and partial automation mode in Williston, Florida, the NTSB had made 3 safety recommendations to NISA, and the U.S. Department of Transportation to define and apply data parameters for automated vehicle systems and defined a standard format for reporting this data. In action by the USDOT and NITSA and mandating recording of advanced driver assistance system related elements, hinders crash investigations, as well as limiting the usefulness of the standing general order database for level 2 incidents, thereby reducing NITS's capability to effectively monitor the safety of level 2 systems. Staff has proposed closing the existing data recording related recommendations to US DOT and NITSA and superseding them with a new recommendation to NITSA to amend the existing regulation in part 563 to require recording of parameters related to the operation of level 2 systems, and other advanced driver assistance systems, in addition to those related to driver engagement. Thank you. This includes staff presentations, and we welcome your questions related to the level 2 crash data. Thank you, Mr. Squire, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna start because I, I have commented many times about Nit's a standing general order. So, Nitsa, in our previous recommendation. I mean, our previous investigations, it might have been Mountain View. It might have been before that. They essentially said they were going to regulate. Level 2 systems through defect investigations. Well, in order to do a defect investigation, you have to know about a crash. In order to know about a crash, the automaker needs to know about a crash. In order for the automaker to know about the crash, you have to have recording capabilities to actually know what happened in the crash. There are, it's well intended. The standing general order and we want that information. certainly. We have weighed in saying, keep this. We need this information, but it has some serious flaws. And how they regulate it as well, uh, based on that information also, it has some serious flaws. So I'm just going to go through this really, really quickly, but that's stunning, standing general order was implemented in July 2021. Requiring manufacturers and operators. To report to the agency's certain crashes. According to the DOT website, the general order allows Nitsu to obtain timely and transparent notification of real world crashes, associated with advanced driver systems and level 2 advanced driver assistance systems, vehicles, for manufacturers and operators, does it? No, not entirely. Uh, with these data, NITSA can respond to crashes that raise safety concerns with these technologies. Really? Not if you don't know about it. Um, so Nitza goes on to say that the reason they issued the general order is to evaluate whether the manufacturers and the vehicles that are equipped with these advanced driver assistance systems, including manufacturers or prototype vehicles are meeting their statutory obligations to ensure that their vehicles and equipment are free from defects. Nitso goes on to say they're going to use them for investigations and then that auto manufacturers can use that information to improve the safety of their vehicles. We know that we know that Ford learned about some of these from online forums. Uh, according to the DOT's website, level 2 vehicles equipped with partial uh, automation systems are generally privately owned. And so, uh, sometimes these crashes aren't reportable and in this situation, there, uh, was a lack of recording. One thing I have stated, and it was after Nitsa had released the results of their standing general order, I don't know if you remember, I had issued a press statement saying it was like comparing apples to oranges. Why? Because Tesla reports a whole lot. So then it looks like Tesla bad, everybody else good. But in actuality, it's just that they report more. They report more data, they report more incidents and accidents, than anybody else. And it looks, uh, it looks like they are bad, and everybody else is okay. Uh, we actually, and I know that you just talked about some of these statistics, uh, that were mentioned in this report, uh, over a period of time, and I'll just repeat them since the start of the standing general order in July 2021 through April 15, 2025, reporting varies dramatically among automakers, 8 automakers reported fewer than 10 incidents, 10 automakers reported between 10 and 50 reported, uh, or incidents. Honda reported 112 and Tesla reported 2093 incidents. Nitz's database indicates that telematics was a source, about 69% of them, with Tesla's telematics accounting for 96%. Uh, I actually went into the database before we had this board meeting to get more updated results and see where we are today. Since the standing general order was issued and the database was 1st active. And then actually since January, June 16th, 2025, up until February 26th, 2026, there have been 998 reports for level 28S incident data. 82% of those reports are Tesla. And it's not that there's, it's not, it should not be taken as there's a problem with Tesla. Tesla reports more. So if Nitza is going to regulate, based on defect, investigations, and they don't know about a crash, and the automaker doesn't know about the crash, and you're not recording data, how is it that you can improve safety over time? Does that make sense for how you are regulating safety? Anyone? No, it doesn't make sense. Sorry, I had to go on to go out to. I was just trying to make a point. It's ridiculous. Um, with that, I'll turn it over to vice chairman Graham. Thank you, chair. Good point. Um, I just got a couple questions. Do these vehicles have any capability of automatically transmitting information directly to Ford? Yes, it was at Dr. Betchich, uh, before on, they had 2 telematics programs. It basically purports on the status of the vehicle, the functionality, what mode they're operating in, and certain vehicle parameters. But nothing really about the blue cruise engaged or blue it did have for, but anything on the ADAS system. It does. The main thing that we noticed that we consider was a deficiency was it didn't have direct crash notification. In other words, the as in the case of Tesla, they get notified when an airbag is deployed. that specific data they get. In this case, there wasn't specific crash related data. So do we know how Ford is using this information that they receive? To monitor, well, they monitor the performance of their vehicle, so it would be to improve, to see how the systems are performing and to make improvements as might be needed. Are they using it as to proactively enhance safety, do we now? Um Any optimaker is using them for their own purposes. To what extent, it's due to learning how their customers are using it, whether those systems are used or other purposes, we don't really know. Do we know if they have the technology today to be able to send off the crash data automatically? Well, clearly, since the telemedic, the various telematic data collection of programs are used to collect and transmit various information as Mr. Squire has described, they could also transmit parameters such as your bag, uh, deployment, which would be key, uh, parameter that would indicate this is a crash that might meet, and it says, as your reporting criteria. So the technology is certainly there. The technology is there. It looks like they're missing an opportunity. It looks like others are missing an opportunity. not just forward. Thank you. Remember Chapman. Uh, with regard to Tesla, why why is it that Tesla is reporting so much more? Is it that the telematics are superior or that the parameters that are being reported are capturing more um more occurrences that maybe indicate a crash or is it a little of both? I mean, what is the reason? Do we know? I think they would probably describe themselves more as a technology company in addition to an auto manufacturer. So Tesla has always had that, uh, that desire for the more technology and it does do a lot more communicating with the manufacturer, their vehicles. They have much more, uh, they won't say control over the vehicles with regard to the data that goes back and forth. Uh, and I, I, just, I'm a little confused about this, and you can clarify, is the recording of level 2 partial automation data? Is that a requirement or is that done voluntarily? The reporting? The standing general order is required under certain circumstances. Again, when the level 2 systems are engaged at the time of a crash or they're engaged within 30 seconds of a crash. Okay. Alright, and in the case of the, yeah, Chris, go ahead. Um, the recording of level 2 information is not required. So what we saw from these 2 crashes was voluntary. Um, and Mr. Squire can talk about this more, but even the data that's on an electronic data recorder or an airbag control module, however you want to refer to that, um, that recording is not required. But if a manufacturer does have an electronic data recorder, then there are specific requirements for what must be required, but those do not include any sort of parameters dealing with advanced driver assistance systems or SAE level 2 activation or engagement or anything along those lines. Okay, thank you. That's that's helpful. Um, in, in these 2 crashes, the um The last 5 minutes and 30 seconds of the San Antonio crash were not captured, and none of the Philadelphia crash trip was captured. Do we know why that is? So this is a, you're referring to the telematic data. It was not captured. Yes. So one of the, if you want to call them limitations, but since these are not required, Ford was not required to record any of this information, and the limitations that we were describing, uh, were likely due to the general limitations and the robustness of their telematic, uh, program, as Mr. Squire has described, uh, in comparison to Tesla for like other legacy automakers are a little bit behind in terms of using telematic data collection programs to, uh, more comprehensively and in more robust way collected information. But again, they are not required to collect any of it. Thank you. And what does the European Union require? In this area. Do we know? I don't have the information right in front of me on what the European Union requires, but I did want to add to your previous question that, um, while Dr. Bechuch is pointing out that it's not required for manufacturers to record this information. As a result of NTSB's Williston report, we recognized this deficiency back in 2016 and made recommendations that this type of information needed to be recorded on these types of vehicles. And when NITSA 1st came out with the standing general order in 2021, we met with them and said that we anticipated the deficiency that the chairwoman pointed out that Tesla would be reporting the majority of the crashes based on our experiences in investigating various crashes with various manufacturers. So, while it's not required, it's certainly been well known for almost 10 years now that this is a deficiency. Regarding the requirements of vehicles in the European Union, they are required to record a number of these parameters related to partial automation and other driver assistance technologies. They are required in the European. Okay, thank you. Thanks thanks to all of you. Thanks chair. Remember DeLu. Yes, I found this interesting topic, since I have a lot of background in this, what we call folkwa in the airline industry. So, um, a couple questions on that. The data that is being collected for the different manufacturers, there's no standard necessary, what we should be collecting, right? That's correct. There's, uh, if you do have an electronic data recorder. There's certain parameters that you need to record, but they're very focused on crash pulse. So vehicle velocity, acceleration steering, braking, that type of information, but not associated with the advanced driver assistance systems. Okay, that's great. And then do they have any forms at all in the automotive industry where the manufacturers get together and discuss this type of like, hey, here's what we're capturing? Because, like, and I hate to use aviation as a standard on it, but in aviation, we collect that at a certain airport, we tell everybody because that we all get to learn from it. Is there anything like that that exists among the manufacturers? There are systems in the highway environment that are similar to the aviation, folkwell or flight operational quality assurance program. Um, Early on in the early 2000s, there was a program called camp or crash avoidance metrics um partnership. And this was originally formed by GM and Ford in 1995. More currently, there's a system called parts or partnership for analytics research in traffic safety. That was formed in 2018, and some of the information that we've been talking about for the effectiveness of automatic emergency braking, for example, is coming out of this type of voluntary shared information from the manufacturers with NITSA, and then coming together with a 3rd party, just like the flight operational quality assurance program does. So it's looking at the effectiveness of these types of systems so that we can, um, then learn from them. As we've been pointing out, the safety of these various base systems has been proven to be effective. Um, okay, so the follow-up with that in, uh, because I'm from Texas, I happen to know this. I don't know about the other states, but in July of 2024, the text attorney general, uh, actually opened investigation to this, saying that the manufacturers were sharing information for drivers, uh, the way people are driving that. I'll read directly here, said that car, they were investigating several car manufacturers regarding allegations that the companies had improperly collected mass amounts of data about drivers, directed for the vehicles, and then sold the information to 3rd parties. So, I don't know what other states are doing. Are you seeing that could have a negative effect on this discussion we're having? I can't speak specific to the circumstances in Texas. I do know from our investigations and working with manufacturers as parties. They're very careful in the information that they share and protecting the privacy of the individuals and we have to work to be able to get the information. So, um, I certainly know from our experience, they have been very proactive to protect the privacy of the drivers in the crashes that we've investigated. One less girly question, I guess, on the whole subject, the telematics. So let's say I get one of these brand new Ford excursions that have the Blue Cruise, and I'm driving it, but I rented it. So do rental cars, this telematics, do you have it? Does it get to the rental car company or does it go to Ford? I mean, I mean, are we are we collecting the data for rental cars, let's say? Well, the regarding the general telematic data collection of programs that Mr. Squire described, so those go directly to Ford, whether a vehicle owned by a car rental company, uh, allows it, uh, because current company, uh, may disable it. But typically that's telematic data would go too forward, not too currental company, whether they have their own device that collects information. Is there a prohibition that a private owner of a car, has EDR, can I disconnect it? Is there any prohibition for me doing that? I wouldn't know. Because they posted online where the EDRs and all the aircraft, on all their cars, and it tells you, disable them. Are you, are you saying, is there the ability for individual owners to disable the electronic data recorder? Well, they can. Uh, so as I, as I pointed out earlier, the electronic data recorder isn't a requirement, but if it is installed, then, um, there has to be specific minimum information uh, that's recorded on it. Of course, that's why staff is proposing a recommendation that we want, if you're operating at these SAE level 2 systems, to have it be mandatory, that this type of information is recorded, and of course, we wouldn't want it to be able to be turned off by... And I support that. I guess what the follow-up question is, is there may be a, um, I don't know why they would want to, but like a rental car company, they might disable them. So there is there any prohibition from people doing that other? I know privately owned, you could probably say I'm going to do it, but is there an incentive for the, let's say, rental car companies or people lease cars to do that? I guess I'm going to refer back to our proposed recommendation that we would want it to be a requirement. And if it was a requirement, then they would not be able to disable that type of recording system. Which I support. Thank you. Thank you. Nice job. Vice Chairman Graham. Anything? You have anything? Anything further? Okay great. We're gonna go to the other round. Uh, go ahead, vice chairman grand. Thank you, chair. Dr. Betchik. I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you a couple questions here about other technologies out there. Are there any other potential technologies that could have medicated these conditions of this crash, maybe alerted the driver or actually engaged the blue cruise to slow down before a collision? I'm going to guess that you are thinking about V connected vehicle technology or V2X, and particularly considering the challenges that vehicle residence sensors have in detection of stationary vehicle as a hazard. Uh, the V2X would be an excellent technology because stationary vehicle or moving would not present a challenge of providing a much earlier alert to a driver about the potential hazard. Absolutely. Thank you for that. I know uh, I think both of these crashes are useful case studies for uh, B2X or vehicle to everything technology. For example, the San Antonio crash had both vehicles been equipped with radio transponters and communicating with each other, the Ford driver, and perhaps the Ford Blue Cruise system as well could have been alerted much sooner to the presence of a stopped vehicle on the roadway. We have many pending recommendations regarding B2X or vehicle to everything technology. And I believe these are 2 more cases we add to our already extensive list about the need to equip all vehicles, including level 2 vehicles with vehicle to everything or B2X technology. Thank you, chair, let's a lamp. Thank you, member Chapman. No questions in this round. Thanks. Remember DeLoo. Uh, no questions of the end to another special thanks to the staff for this comprehensive and fullness, fulsomeness report. Thank you. And my last question would be for Miss Catania. How do we work for improving safety after we leave this board meeting? Thank you for that question, Chairman Harmandy. After the board meeting, uh, the Office of Safety recommendations and communications, we'll work with all of you. And the NTSB staff and our stakeholders to raise awareness and visibility of these key safety issues and the recommendations adopted today. Um, we will engage with recommendation recipients to ensure that they understand the actions required, uh, to implement our recommendations, and we will emphasize the importance of helping the driver, driving public, understand the capabilities and limitations of vehicles with partial automation, and ensuring that future driving um, monitor systems, minimize disengagement, automation, complacency, and misuse of vehicle automation. We will amplify our recommendations and safety issues through our available channels, including our automation web page, and social media, and we will advise Congress and our recommendations on our recommendations, and we'll monitor any legislative efforts. Right? Thank you very much. We're gonna, uh, take a 15 minute break, uh, before we move into findings the probable causes and recommendations. So uh 115. I think we're gonna go ahead and start a couple minutes early since everyone is back. Um, okay, Mr. Curtis, will you please read the proposed findings? Certainly chair. As a result of these investigations, staff proposes 20 new findings. Number one, none of the following were factors in the San Antonio crash. One, the licensing of either driver, two, the Ford driver's experience with his vehicle, three, intoxication of the Ford driver, four, the mechanical condition of the Ford, five highway factors, or six, weather. Number 2. None of the following were factors in the Philadelphia crash. One, the licensing of the Ford driver, two, the mechanical condition of the Ford, three highway factors, or four, weather. Number three, the emergency responses to both the San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes were timely and adequate. Number 4. In the San Antonio crash, the reasons for the Honda being stopped in the center lane could not be determined, but the Honda driver's alcohol impairment could have contributed. Number five. The Ford driver in the San Antonio crash did not respond to the stationary vehicle ahead, despite having adequate opportunity to identify the hazard, and initiate an evasive maneuver, due to distraction from use of the vehicle's infotainment system, and over reliance on the vehicle's partial automation. Number six. The Ford driver in the Philadelphia crash did not respond to the stopped vehicles ahead, despite having adequate opportunity to identify the hazard and initiate an evasive maneuver, due to a combination of potentially interacting factors, including impairment from substance use, disengagement from the driving task, likely due to cell phone use, and over reliance on the vehicles, partial automation, and speeding, which reduced the duration of clear line of sight to the stopped elantra. Number seven, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's failure to meet the statutory rate date for completing a final rule requiring advanced, impaired driving technology on all new passenger vehicles continues to expose the public to dangers posed by impaired drivers. Or eight. If the Ford and the Philadelphia crash had been traveling at the posted speed limit of 45 miles per hour, instead of 72 miles per hour, the Ford collision warning and automatic emergency braking systems would have been more likely to alert the driver sooner or mitigate the crash, based on the Ford MarkE performance in the existing testing protocols. Number nine, the circumstances of the San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes, stationary lead vehicle, striking vehicle traveling, at highway speed, and nighttime conditions, were likely outside the capabilities of the Ford vehicle's collision avoidance systems, forward collision warning, and automatic emergency braking, available at the time of the crash, but are addressed in the performance parameters of the recently issued Federal Motor vehicle Safety Standard, 127. Number 10. The San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes revealed limitations in the Ford Motor Company's design of its telematics data collection programs, which did not transmit direct crash parameters, such as airbag deployment. These limitations restrict the automaker's ability to identify relevant crashes, and comply with the reporting requirements of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's SAE International Level 2 Standing General Order. Number 11. The San Antonio and Philadelphia Investigations, which reveal delays in manufacturer awareness of crashes involving active SAE, international level 2, L2, systems, and reporting disparities across manufacturers in both the number of incidents reported, and the information sources for the reports, show that the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's L2 standing general order, incident database, likely does not reflect the full extent of L2 related crashes in the United States or the factors that contribute to these crashes. Number 12. When automakers lack a mechanism to become informed about incidents involving their vehicles that meet the reporting criteria specified in the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's SAE International Level 2, L2, Standing General Order, SGO, as was the case for Ford in the San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes, the completeness of L2SGO incident data cannot be assured. And the automaker's ability to investigate these incidents and the safety risks associated with L2 systems are likely to be limited. Number 13. The circumstances of the San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes demonstrate that without federal requirements for the recording of SAE International Level 2 L2 data, critical pre-crash information, such as L2 or Advanced Driver Assistance Systems activation, and crash information, such as driver or system evasive actions, and system hazard detection, remains inconsistent and inaccessible to local law enforcement, safety investigators, regulators and automakers. Number 14. In action by the U.S. Department of Transportation and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, and HTSA, and establishing requirements for recording automated vehicle control system data, including the supporting advanced driver assistant systems features, continues to enable non-standardized and inconsistent, inconsistent data collection, hindering crash investigations, and NHTSA's oversight of potential safety defects associated with SAE International Level 2 L2 systems, as well as limiting the broader usefulness of NHTSA's L2 standing general order, incident database, and revealing incidents and crashes involving partial automation. Number 15. The Ford Motor Company's driver monitoring system implementation, which allowed brief driver glances to the forward roadway to reset the distraction alert timer, does not effectively mitigate visual distraction and driver disengagement following off-road glances. For 16. In the San Antonio crash, the Ford driver's repeated off road glances, combined with his insufficient, brief on road glances to detect the stationary vehicle ahead, demonstrate the risks of accumulated glances away from the roadway, and highlight the need for prolonged glance pattern evaluation and driver monitoring system implementation. Number 17. In the Philadelphia crash, the limitations of the Ford Motor Company's driver monitoring system, DMS, and distinguishing between forward roadway attention and attention to objects positioned, and the driver's line of sight to the roadway, would have permitted the Ford driver to use her phone in a distracting manner without receiving a DMS alert. Number 18. An urgent need exists for standardized U.S.-based driver monitoring system, DMS performance requirements, as demonstrated by the DMS deficiencies observed in the San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes, and in previous National Transportation Safety Board investigations, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's ongoing research, and plans to develop objective and repeatable procedures for assessing DMS effectiveness, and el driver distraction. And the more stringent performance testing protocols already implemented by the European New Car Assessment Program, and Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. Number 19. The San Antonio and Philadelphia crashes revealed implementation deficiencies, including allowing drivers to disable the automatic emergency braking system, not required, not requiring the current engagement of vehicle equipped, intelligent, adaptive cruise control, ACC, active intelligence speed assistance, permitting hands-free partial automation and work zones, with reduced speed limits, and allowing intelligent ACC to be configured with cruise speed tolerances up to 20 miles per hour above posted speed limits. And number 20. The lack of federal guidance for SAE international level 2 systems and passenger vehicles has led to safety critical design gaps and mitigating known system limitations, enhancing safety redundancy, by ensuring concurrent engagement, of safety technologies, and promoting driver engagement by design. Thank you, Mr. Curtis. Are there any amendments to the findings, as proposed? No, is there a motion to adopt the findings? So moved. Second? Second? Right? The motion to adopt the findings, and the second has been presented, Mr. McMurray, you've got both of those? I did. Okay great. Please call the roll and tally the... All right, board if in favor of the findings I was presented. Say aye, if opposed, say A. Vice chairman Graham. Aye. Member Chapman? Aye, member DeLoo. Aye, and chair homandy. Aye. All right, chair unanimous, about to adopt the findings I was presented. Great. Thank you, Mr. Curtis. Will you please read the proposed probable cause for the San Antonio crash? Staff proposes the following probable cause for the San Antonio Texas crash. The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the San Antonio, Texas crash was the driver's failure to respond to the stationary vehicle ahead due to distraction, likely from the in vehicle navigation system, stemming from overreliance on the vehicle's hands free partial automation system and disengagement from the driving task. Contributing to the crash was the inability of the Ford vehicle's partial automation system, including its automatic emergency braking system, to detect and respond to the stationary vehicle ahead. Also contributing to the crash was the location of the stationary vehicle, which may have been stopped in the center lane of the highway due to the impairment of its driver. Thank you, Mr. Curtis. Is there a motion? Are there any amendments? Can I ask a question? Yep. Contributed crash was location, which may have been stopped, it was stopped. I just want to make sure that's clearly understood. So, did you see what I'm asking? And I understand you said, which may have been stopped in this in line, do the impairment, but we're saying, which was probably due the impairment, not the fact that it was stopped. It was stopped on the road, right? Our intent was that the, which may have been stopped is due to the impairment. May have been stopped due to the impairment of the driver. Okay. was our intent. So which may have been stopped due the impairment. So what stopped on the roadway? I just wanted to be clear on that piece of it, but maybe I'm the only one that missed that piece. Are you, I'm sorry, can you say that last part again, please? Well, you, the way it's written, which may have been stopped, so I can do the impairment of the driver, but the car was stopped. So do we need to clarify that, or is this? Um, I guess I would yield to you in the sense of, um, I read it as the, which may have been stopped due to the impairment of its driver, um, but if there's, if you feel that's confusing, we certainly agree it was stopped in the center lane. Do my fellow colleagues read it that way, too? Okay, I'm good. Thank you. Thank you. Great. Any amendments, then? No? Uh, motion to adopt? So moved? Second? Second. Alright. Mr. McMurray. All right. Board. This is vote on the probable cause, as presented, vice chairman Graham. I, member Chapman. Hi, member to Lou, aye, and chair comedy. Hi. Okay, chair, unanimous vote in favor. Thank you. Mr. Curtis, if you can read the proposed probable cause for the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania crash. Certainly cheer. For the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania crash, the National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania crash was the driver's failure to respond to the stationary vehicles ahead due to impairment from alcohol that may have been worsened by cannabis use, as well as distraction, likely from cell phone use, stemming from over reliance on and misuse of the vehicle's hands free partial automation system. Contributing to the crash was the driver's operation of the vehicle, about 27 miles per hour, over the speed limit, and a work zone. Further contributing to the crash was the Ford Motor Company's inadequate integration of his active speed management system, with this partial automation system, which permitted excessive speed, including in a work zone, Germany. And any amendments to the proposed probable cause for Philadelphia? Hearing none, motion to adopt. So moved? Second? Second. Mr. McMurray. All right, board. This is a vote in favor of the probable cause, again, as presented, Vice Chairman Graham. I, Member Chapman. Hi. Member DeLoo. Aye, and chair Hamidi. Aye. Unanimous fun chair. Great, thank you, Mr. Curtis. Can you please read the recommendations as proposed? As a result of these investigations, staff proposes six new safety recommendations. Number one, to the U.S. Department of Transportation. Issue comprehensive guidelines for vehicle manufacturers implementing partial vehicle automation systems that address known system limitations, including integration and concurrent engagement of other safety critical technologies, such as automatic emergency braking, active intelligence speed assistance, and driver monitoring system. Promoting driver engagement by design, reducing the safety risks associated with automation, complacency, and misuse, and setting maximum operational speeds for automation systems based on overall system capabilities. Three recommendations to the national highway traffic safety administration. Number two, require manufacturers to equip new SAE international level 2 capable passenger vehicles with a telematic system that notifies the manufacturer of crashes meeting your reporting requirements and standing order general 2021 dash 01. Number three. Amend 49 code of federal regulations, part 563, event data recorders, to require that all new SAE international level 2 capable passenger vehicles record data elements related to these systems, including at a minimum, system availability, engagement, and activation denial, driver alerts, and system faults for automatic emergency braking, forward collision warning, driver monitoring system, lane departure, prevention, lane centering, partial automation system operation, and any other systems deemed necessary. Number four, require that all new SAE international level 2 capable passenger vehicles be equipped with driver monitoring systems capable of minimizing driver disengagement, automation complacency, and misuse of automation by at a minimum, providing warnings about accumulated short glances over a prolonged period of time. Differentiating genuine on road glances from attention directed to objects, such as cell phones, located in the driver's forward line of sight, and issuing initial and subsequent multimodal alerts at intervals that minimize eyes off road duration. Two recommendations to the Ford Motor Company, number five. Revise the driver monitoring systems, DMS, in your new vehicles to detect and provide warnings about accumulated short distractions over a prolonged period of time. Differentiate genuine driver on road glances from attention directed to objects, such as cell phones, located in the driver's forward line of sight, and issue initial and subsequent multimodal alerts at intervals that minimize eyes off road duration. Number six. Modify your Blue Cruise system for new vehicles to require that the automatic emergency braking system is engaged and that the intelligent adaptive cruise control system uses appropriate speed tolerances to mitigate excessive speeding, taking into consideration the system's operational capabilities, as well as traffic and highway complexity. Additionally, Staff proposes reiterating one previously issued recommendation to the national highway traffic safety administration. Recommendation H 2222. require that all new vehicles be equipped with passive vehicle integrated alcohol impairment detection systems, advanced drive, driver monitoring systems, or a combination thereof. The systems must be capable of preventing or limiting vehicle operation if driver impairment by alcohol is detected. SAP proposes to classify six previously issued recommendations. One to the U.S. Department of Transportation, recommendation H 17 37. Define the data parameters needed to understand the automated vehicle control systems involved in a crash. The parameters must reflect the vehicle's control status, and the frequency and duration of control actions to adequately characterize driver and vehicle performance before and during a crash. Staff proposes to classify this recommendation, closed, unacceptable response, superseded by recommendation three, to the new recommendation three, to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. For to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Recommendation H 17 39. Use the data parameters, defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation, and response to safety recommendation H 17 37 as a benchmark for new vehicles equipped with automated vehicle control systems, so that they capture data that reflect the vehicle's control status, and the frequency and duration of control actions needed to adequately characterize driver and vehicle performance before and during a crash. The captured data should be readily available too, at a minimum, national transportation safety board investigators, and national highway traffic safety administration regulators. Staff proposes to clarify this recommendation, close unacceptable response, superseded by new recommendation 3 to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Recommendation H 17 40. Define a standard format for reporting automated vehicle control systems data, and require manufacturers of vehicles equipped with automated vehicle control systems to report incidents, crashes, and vehicle miles operated with such systems enabled. Staff proposes to classify this recommendation closed, unacceptable response, superseded by new recommendation 3 to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Recommendation H dash 20 dash 3. For vehicles equipped with level 2 automation, work with SAE International to develop performance standards, for driver monitoring systems that will minimize driver disengagement, prevent automation complacency, and account for foreseeable misuse of the automation. Staff proposes to classify this recommendation closed, acceptable response, superseded, by new recommendation for to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Recommendation H dash 20 dash 4. After developing the performance standards for driver monitoring systems, recommended in safety recommendation, H dash 20 3, require that all new passenger vehicles with level 2 automation be equipped with a driver monitoring system that meets these standards. Staff proposes to classify this recommendation closed, acceptable response, superseded, by new recommendation for to the National Highway Traffic, safety administration. And one to SAE, SAE International Recommendation H-20-7. For vehicles equipped with level 2 automation, work with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to develop performance standards for driver monitoring systems that will minimize driver disengagement, prevent automation complacency, and account for foreseeable misuse of the automation. Staff proposes to classify this recommendation close unacceptable action, no response received. And finally, SAT proposes to classify new recommendation 3 as open, unacceptable response upon its issuance. All right. So, we have recommendation three, Danitsa, which would be opened unacceptable. We are closing, unacceptable. Some closing, acceptable others, opening, await response. The one I really want to point out is to SAE International. When was that issued? Can you pull that up real quick? In 2020? And they just decided not to respond. We never received a response. We had a meeting with them. We had a couple of exchanges with them, and we just haven't received a formal response. And when we met with Nitz and preparing for this report, They mentioned that they had not been working with SAE, that they could do the work on their own. Yeah, but as they, but they also informed us, as they pretty much had no desire to do anything. I don't recall that part of the discussion. It's written in the report, that they didn't have any interest in pursuing it. Okay, I mean, that's pretty bad. I will say SA every year invites us to their conference to make presentations in January, and every year invites us. Certainly, they can write to invite us, to invite to events so that we can talk about critical safety issues, but then they fail, to actually respond in writing to a safety recommendation, and actually take any action on it. I think that's pretty shameful. So I'm going to probably remember that the next time I get there. Very timely invitation that they wrote to us asking that we do a presentation. So with that, are there any questions or amendments to these recommendations or their classifications? Nope. Okay. Is there a motion to adopt? So moved? I'll do the second. And Mr. McMurray. All right, Chair, this is a vote in favor of the recommendations and classifications as presented, Vice Chairman Graham. Aye. Remember Grant Chapman? Hi. Member DeLoo. Hi. and Chair Harmody. Hi. Okay, chair unanimous vote to adopt. Great, thank you. Are there any amendments to the report? All right. Is there a motion to adopt the final report as presented? So moved? Second? Second. Alright, Mr. McMurray. A vote in favor of the report as presented Vice Chairman Graham. Aye. Member DeLou. I, I'm sorry, out of order, member Chapman. Aye. And Chair Homandy. Hi. All right, unanimous voe chair. Thank you very much. Our deliberations have now concluded. I'd like to thank Vice Chairman Graham, member Chapman, and member Delou for their preparation in advance of today's meeting. I failed to point out that Mr. Sultan Akbar Sultan is our new director of research and engineering. Thank you for joining the NTSB. And, you know, I continue to steal, be talented and wonderful people from NASA. So, I mean, their losses are game. We discussed important topics that will benefit the final report and inform our safety recommendations. I'd like to thank the following organizations for their collaboration with us on scene and their role as parties to each investigation, the San Antonio Police Department, the Pennsylvania State Police, and the Ford Motor Company, which was a party to both investigations. The NTSB works under what we call the party system, meaning we bring together technical experts from those involved in the accident to help us gather, and develop the facts around the investigation. Parties are not part of the analysis, or development of the findings, probable cause, or safety recommendations, but they are a critical part of our investigation, and we appreciate their efforts, their communications, and their time. I'd like to extend our deep appreciation to team and TSB, including our colleagues throughout the Office of Highway Safety, the Office of Research and Engineering, the Office of General Council, and the Office of Managing Director for their work over the course of this investigation, and then the development of an excellent report. I also want to express our appreciation to our colleagues in the Office of Chief Information Officer. The invest... sorry, I have allergies, they're killing me. The Investigative Support Services Division, and the Office of Safety Recommendations and Communications, for your diligent work. and advocacy to improve safety. When acted upon, the recommendations we've issued today will save lives. When acted upon are the key words. Going forward, the NTSB looks forward to working with all the organizations that we issued recommendations to today to make sure they are fully implemented. With that, I would like to, once again, offer our sincere sympathies to those who lost loved ones or who those were injured in these 2 crashes on behalf of the entire board. Please know that our hearts are with you, and we will continue work going forward to improve safety to ensure this never happens again. And with that, chair. Yep. Concurring statements. Oh, yeah, I forgot to ask, does anyone reserve the right for concurring or dissenting statements? No. All right. Thank you very much, and we stand adjourned.